Measurement Science and Technology
REVIEW ARTICLE
Iterative image deformation methods in PIV
To cite this article: F Scarano 2002 Meas. Sci. Technol. 13 R1
 
View the article online for updates and enhancements.
Related content
Analysis and alternatives in 2D multigrid
PIVmethods
J Nogueira, A Lecuona, U Ruiz-Rivas et al.
-
A super-resolution PIV interrogation
approach by means of velocity second
derivativescorrelation
F Scarano
-
Windowing, re-shaping and re-orientation
interrogationwindows in PIV
D Di Florio, F Di Felice and G P Romano
-
Recent citations
Robust principal component analysis for
modal decomposition of corrupt fluid flows
Isabel Scherl et al
-
Characteristics of wall-attached motions in
open channel flows
-
Particle Image Velocimetry Based on a
Deep Learning Motion Estimator
Shengze Cai et al
-
This content was downloaded from IP address 145.94.79.174 on 01/06/2020 at 14:05
INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS PUBLISHING                                                                                                                                                                              MEASUREMENT SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Meas. Sci. Technol. 13 (2002) R1?R19                                                                                                                                               PII: S0957-0233(02)20239-8
REVIEW ARTICLE
Iterative image deformation methods in
PIV
F Scarano
Faculty of Aerospace Engineering, Delft University of Technology, Kluyverweg 1, 2629 HS
Delft, The Netherlands
Received 19 December 2000, in final form and accepted for publication
27 September 2001
Published 23 November 2001
Online at stacks.iop.org/MST/13/R1
Abstract
Image processing methods for particle image velocimetry (PIV) are
reviewed. The discussion focuses on iterative methods aimed at enhancing
the precision and spatial resolution of numerical interrogation schemes.
Emphasis is placed on the efforts made to overcome the limitations of
the correlation interrogation method with respect to typical problems such as
in-plane loss of pairs, velocity gradient compensation and correlation peak
locking. The discussion shows how the correlation signal benefits from
simple operations such as the window-offset technique, or the continuous
window deformation, which compensates for the in-plane velocity gradient.
The image interrogation process is presented within the discussion of the
image matching problem and several algorithms and implementations
currently in use are classified depending on the choice made about the
particle image pattern matching scheme.
Several methods that differ in their implementations are found to be
substantially similar. Iterative image deformation methods that account for
the continuous particle image pattern transformation are analysed and the
effect of crucial choices such as image interpolation method, displacement
prediction correction and correlation peak fit scheme are discussed. The
quantitative performance assessment made through synthetic PIV images
yields order-of-magnitude improvement on the precision of the particle
image displacement at a sub-pixel level when the image deformation is
applied. Moreover, the issue of spatial resolution is addressed and the
limiting factors of the specific interrogation methods are discussed.
Finally, an attempt for a flow-adaptive spatial resolution method is
proposed. The method takes into account the local velocity derivatives in
order to perform a local increase of the interrogation spatial density and a
refinement of the local interrogation window size. The resulting spatial
resolution is selectively enhanced. The method’s performance is analysed
and compared with some precursor techniques, namely the conventional
cross-correlation analysis with and without the effect of a window discrete
offset and deformation.
The suitability of the method for the measurement in turbulent flows is
illustrated with the application to a turbulent backward facing step flow.
Keywords:  image processing, PIV, CIV, window deformation, adaptive
resolution, iterative, multigrid
(Some figures in this article are in colour only in the electronic version)
0957-0233/02/010001+19$30.00    c 2002 IOP Publishing Ltd    Printed in the UK                                                                                      R1
F Scarano
1.  Introduction
The    particle    image    velocimetry    (PIV)    technique    has
experienced a considerable progress over more than a decade
and  is  still  considered  as  under  development.    Due  to  its
increased reliability and accuracy the PIV technique has gained
the reputation of a powerful and time-effective flow diagnostic
method. It is currently employed as a measurement technique
for the quantitative whole-field study of complex fluid flows
and in several industrial applications.
The growth of the PIV technique due to the improvement
of  its  hardware  components  is  clear:    nanosecond  pulse
duration and high-energy lasers, high-resolution and low-noise
interline  transfer  CCD  captors,  fast  frame  grabbers,  etc  are
among  the  major  factors  that  have  raised  the  quality  of  the
illuminating and recording conditions (Riethmuller 2000).
Nevertheless,    digital   image   analysis   methods   have
an  undoubted  impact  on  the  performance  of  the  overall
measurement technique and often such contribution is more
difficult to quantify.
On  such  a  basis  a  distinction  can  be  made  between
two  specific  problems  to  be  solved  when  performing  a
PIV  measurement.   At  first,  providing  the  experiment  with
appropriate flow seeding as well as lighting and an accurate
image recording mostly relies on the choice of the hardware
configuration.      After  that,   analysing  the  recordings  and
extracting  most  of  the  embedded  information  becomes  a
problem of digital image analysis and depends on a specific
algorithm implementation.
The introduction of the PIV technique based on digital
technology  opened  at  the  beginning  of  the  last  decade  a
remarkable activity in the domain of digital analysis of seeded
fluid motion (Utami and Ueno 1984, 1991).
Initial  attempts  at  digital  particle  imaging  (Kimura  and
Takamori  1986)  were  viewed  with  scepticism  due  to  the
far lower spatial resolution with respect to the photographic
technique, the argument being that the accuracy in the estimate
of the displacement was basically given by half the pixel unit
(Hesselink 1988).  This turned out to be too conservative and
estimate of the correlation peak location by means of sub-pixel
interpolation was demonstrated to considerably improve the
accuracy, with errors as low as one-tenth of a pixel (Willert
and Gharib 1991).
However, early approaches to PIV image processing were
mostly a reproduction of the optical interrogation technique
based on Young’s fringe analysis (Cho 1989, Keane and Adrian
1992).  The hardware optical correlation was coded with the
spatial  auto-  and  cross-correlation  functions  via  numerical
Fourier transform of the image intensity field.   At the same
time it was demonstrated that it was possible to obtain, with
relatively low resolution, digital images results comparable to
those coming from photographic PIV (Westerweel 1993).
Within   less   than   a   decade   the   literature   flourished
with  investigations  focusing  on  digital  algorithms  for  PIV
image  analysis  resulting  in  a  global  effort  directed  towards
the  improvement  of  measurement  precision  and  reliability.
A   further   demonstration   of   the   ongoing   development
of   the   PIV   technique   is   the   organization   of   dedicated
conferences  on  a  constant  basis  and  the  recent  worldwide
co-operation/challenge  project  for  the  assessment  of  PIV
performances (www.pivchallenge.org).
As  an  indicator  of  the  performance  growth  it  can  be
mentioned  that  from  the  earlier  methods  to  those  currently
used,   the  spatial  resolution  collectively  improved  with  a
reduction  of  the  interrogation  window  size  (in  pixels).    A
typical  box  size  of  64  ×  64  pixels  or  larger,   in  use  at
the  beginning  of  the  decade,  was  reduced  to  a  standard  of
32 × 32  pixels,  or  even  to  less  than  10 × 10  pixels  under
prescribed conditions (Hart 1998, 2000, Fincham and Delerce
2000, Louren，
co and Krothapalli 1998, Nogueira et al 2001).
Moreover, the measurement uncertainty solely associated
with    the    image    interrogation    procedure    was    reduced
considerably from a typical value of one-tenth of a pixel to
a few hundredths or even less (Westerweel 1997,  Lecordier
1997,  Louren，
co  1999,  Scarano  and  Riethmuller  1999  and
others). Examples are shown in figure 1.
Despite the recognized maturity of the cross-correlation-
based methods, new investigations of the PIV image processing
appear in the literature almost on a monthly basis, and often
methods with a common mathematical background are given
different names or sophisticated acronyms due to a different
algorithmic implementation. The result is a misleading picture
with an increasing variety of solutions to a common image-
processing  problem.   It  is  therefore  important  to  attempt  to
describe some of the common problems encountered in PIV
image  analysis  with  traditional  tools  and,  as  a  counterpart,
to  discuss  some  of  the  different  strategies  proposed  in  the
literature as advanced methods.
In  this  paper  we  discuss  correlation-based  algorithms
under  the  common  denominator  of  the  image  matching
problem. Finally, an image processing method that proposes an
adaptive spatial resolution approach developed by the author is
introduced (window deformation iterative multigrid adaptive
resolution)  with  details  of  the  performance  assessment  and
with a comparative analysis with predecessor methods.
2.  Background
The performance of the PIV technique can be assessed through
the evaluation of quality parameters, namely the measurable
velocity  dynamic  range  (umax    ?  umin)/umin   and  the  spa-
tial  resolution  r.    The  velocity  gradient  dynamic  range
(umax ? umin)/umin  is in most cases a direct result of the
above two quantities (Louren，
co and Krothapalli 1995).  The
dynamic range of the velocity gradient is of interest per se since
it describes important kinematic flow properties (e.g. vorticity,
rate-of-strain, divergence) that drive fluid mechanics phenom-
ena. The confidence level R is addressed as the most important
parameter when discussing the measurement robustness.
The  evaluation  of  the  particle  image  velocity  from  a
digital pair of recordings is usually composed of two separate
problems.    The  image  processing  returns  the  displacement
(i.e. velocity) vector distribution from the particle image of
the  recordings.    The  data  validation  detects  the  presence
of  spurious  measurements  on  the  basis  of  selected  criteria
such  as  correlation  signal-to-noise  ratio  S/N  (Keane  and
Adrian 1992), local median thresholding (Westerweel 1994),
correlation map symmetry (Rohaly et al 2000) among others.
Often these two steps are kept separate and the data validation
is performed only at the end of the evaluation.   However, it
should be mentioned that with recursive methods that repeat
R2
Iterative image deformation methods in PIV
Displacement [pixels]
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
Displacement RMS error [pixels]
162  px, basic cross-correlation
162  px, discr. offset (WIDIM)
162  px, sub-pixel offset
322  px, basic cross-correlation
322  px, discr. offset (WIDIM)
322  px, sub-pixel offset
0                             1                             2                             3
Figure 1.  Left: performance comparison of the cross-correlation method, the local field correction (LFC) method (Nogueira et al 1999) and
an iterative image distortion method (Jambunathan et al 1995). Right: performance of cross-correlation methods: basic cross-correlation;
discrete window offset; iterative multigrid window deformation (Scarano and Riethmuller 2000).
the image evaluation several times, image processing and data
validation might mutually interact.
The following part of the discussion focuses on the image-
processing problem that aims at improving and assessing the
velocity  measurement  precision.    Only  the  case  of  single-
exposure  image  analysis  is  discussed  since  nowadays  this
recording mode is properly supported by standard hardware
in the majority of cases.
It is common for researchers investigating new methods
to compare their performance with a benchmark method.  In
the  case  of  PIV  image  processing  the  reference  method  is
the numerical cross-correlation function.  Its most important
features are:
? a rectangular region (interrogation window) is selected at
a prescribed location on each recording;
? the cross-correlation is performed over the two windows;
? the location of maximum correlation is identified;
? the sub-pixel estimate of the above location is obtained
via local interpolation.
Willert and Gharib (1991) proposed the use of a three-point
Gaussian fit for the peak interpolation and this choice is still
widely adopted.
The normalized cross-correlation function reads as
φfg (m, n) = 
M
i,j=1 f (i, j) g (i ? m, j ? n)
√cov(f )cov(g)                   (2.1)
where  f  and  g  denote  the  grey  intensity  distribution  over
the  interrogation  areas  (with  mean  value  subtraction).   The
denominator is the product of the image covariance over the
respective interrogation windows.
The  parameters  that  most  influence  the  measurement
error ascribed to the recording process are the particle image
diameter,   the  particle  image  density,   the  particle  image
contrast, the out-of-plane displacement and the in-plane image
deformation associated with the velocity gradient.
Several authors have investigated the influence of these
parameters on the measurement uncertainty (Keane and Adrian
(1990), Westerweel (1993), Boillot and Prasad (1996), Raffel
et al (1998) among others). Although discussion is still open on
the subject there is general agreement concerning some points:
Figure 2.  Instantaneous tracer pattern (the two exposures are added
in order to visualize the particle displacement) and velocity
distribution. The labelled squares indicate the interrogation window
size (64 × 64 pixels).
? The velocity dynamic range is limited due to the conflict
between the interrogation window size and the in-plane
displacement that causes ‘loss of pairs’ (Adrian 1991).
? A velocity bias (systematic underestimation) occurs, due
to the finite extent of the interrogation window, resulting
into a trade-off between accuracy and spatial resolution
(Westerweel 1993).
? The  fractional  displacement  estimate  is  dependent  on
the  peak  interpolation  function.     A  typical  form  of
error  introduces  a  bias  towards  integer  values  of  the
displacement bringing the measurement accuracy back to
its ‘discrete nature’.  The phenomenon is thus referred to
as ‘peak locking’ (Westerweel 1993, Louren，
co 1996).
? Peak locking error also occurs when the particles images
R3
F Scarano
are sampled at a poor spatial resolution (particle image
size smaller than two pixels).
? vThe correlation peak signal drops in regions with a large
elocity gradient. Loss of pairs is due to the particle image
pattern deformation.
? The  spatial  resolution  of  the  method  is  limited  by  the
minimum number of particles in the interrogation window.
These points are discussed below, qualitatively observing the
behaviour of the correlation signal when critical conditions are
met with respect to the mentioned problems.
Figure 2 shows an example of a typical PIV experiment in a
turbulent shear flow. The seeding density is relatively uniform
and some spurious reflections occur close to the solid walls.
Some conclusions can be drawn about the characteristics of
the  correlation  signal  in  different  regions  of  the  flow.    In
region A the fluid is practically at rest and the correlation map
is expected to show a maximum located close to the origin and
well distinguished from the noise (figure 3, left).
At location B a significant loss of particle pairs occurs due
to the in-plane displacement.  In fact, since the displacement
is of about ten pixels and the window size is 64 × 64 pixels,
the resulting matching area is reduced of about one-sixth. The
resulting correlation signal is weaker (figure 3, right).
When  dealing  with  the  highly  sheared  flow  at  C,  the
deformation  of  the  particle  image  pattern  between  the  two
exposures  becomes  critical:   the  correlation  peak  becomes
broader and multiple peaks can occur in the direction where
the velocity exhibits the larger variation along the interrogation
window (figure 4, left).  This behaviour is undesirable since it
leads to a higher measurement noise for those regions where
interest is often focused, such as boundary layers, shear layers
or vortices.
Finally,  when  approaching  an  optical  interface  (most
commonly a solid boundary as in region D) spurious reflections
mask the particle image pattern. The resulting correlation map
is affected by a noise pattern aligned in the same direction as
the interface (figure 4, right).
The  remainder  of  this  paper  focuses  on  the  third  case
from the above example, namely the problem of correlating
a particle image pattern that is deformed by a large velocity
gradient.  Some concepts of kinematics and visual motion are
first introduced, in order to then discuss different approaches
to the problem proposed in the literature.
3.  Cross-correlation image matching
Consider  the  planar  motion  of  a  fluid  element  containing  a
tracer  pattern  (figure  5).   The  spatio-temporal  evolution  of
the tracers within the fluid element constitutes a succession of
mappings that produce each image from the previous one. For
each neighbourhood at time t1 the mapping can be expressed in
terms of the local displacement d(x, y) of the neighbourhood
at a location rthat produces the corresponding neighbourhood
in the next image at time t2  in the sequence.
The image flow velocity can be defined as the time rate
of change u(x, y, t) (Horn and Schunk 1981) of the mapping
displacement field d(x, y, t).
As  was  anticipated,  most  PIV  interrogation  techniques
rely on the cross-correlation function to determine the (image)
flow velocity from particle image pairs.
With a degree of generality, the application of this operator
can be interpreted as an optimization process:
max
d    W  f (x, y) g (x + x, y + y) dx dy           (3.1)
where d = (x, y) is the vector parameter to be determined
that maximizes the correlation function between the functions
g(x, y) and f (x, y). The formula yields under certain hypothe-
ses the most probable tracer displacement over the ensemble of
tracers that belong to the interrogation region W (Adrian 1991).
For  an  image  pair  the  velocity  within  the  interrogation
region is then approximated by the expression
u ? t1  ?d
t2 .                             (3.2)
It  is  clear  that  equation  (3.1)  yields  an  exact  match  (unit
correlation peak intensity) when the displacement is uniform
across the interrogation window.
A  higher  degree  of  generality  is  obtained  when  the
optimization is performed considering the displacement spatial
distribution
max
x,yW
f (x, y) g[x + x (x, y) , y + y (x, y)] dx dy.
(3.3)
In this case the intensity distribution in the function g(x, y) is
evaluated considering a displacement distribution that varies
spatially over the interrogation window.
The  implementation  of  such  a  method  implies  that  the
two windows are subjected to a relative translation matching
(performed by ordinary cross-correlation) and to the relative
deformation.
The  output  of  such  an  operator  depends  on  the  spatial
distribution of the displacement over the interrogation window.
When  the  imposed  spatial  distribution  of  the  displacement
corresponds to the actual displacement field, the two images
are expected to produce the maximum match.
The displacement distribution over the finite interrogation
region is estimated by means of a Taylor series:
u (x, y) = u (x0, y0) + ∂∂u
x  (x ? x0)
+∂u
∂y  (y ? y0) + ・ ・ ・ +
1
2!
∂2u
∂x2  (x ? x0)
2
+ ∂
2u
∂x∂y  (x ? x0) (y ? y0)
+∂
2u
∂y2  (y ? y0)
2  + ・ ・ ・ + o (x ? x0)3                            (3.4)
with
x ∈ x0  ? 21 W, x0  + 21 W    and    y ∈ y0  ? 21 W, y0  + 21 W .
In  the  above  expression  (x0,  y0)  denotes  the  centre  of  the
interrogation window W.
When the optimization described in equation (3.4) is im-
plemented using the Taylor series to describe the displacement,
the number of parameters that play a role in the optimization
depend directly on the order of the truncated Taylor expan-
sion. The number of parameters used in the optimization pro-
cess increases with increasing order of the series expansion as
discussed by Tokumaru and Dimotakis (1995).
R4
Iterative image deformation methods in PIV
Figure 3.  Correlation map corresponding to region A (left) and B (right).
Figure 4.  Correlation map corrresponding to region C (left, note the smaller vertical scale) and D (right).
Table 1 summarizes the situation for the two-dimensional
problem. The computational effort for the direct correlation is
used as a reference and is given by N4  where N is the linear
size in pixel of the correlation window.   It should be added
that the computational cost for the case of p   1 is further
increased by the necessary operation of image interpolation at
sub-pixel locations, which is discussed later.  Considering the
overall computational effort, it is clear that the method can be
implemented only when the Taylor series is truncated at a low
order.
Several  methods  currently  adopted  follow  a  different
approach  to  the  problem  of  higher-order  image  matching.
If   an   estimate   of   the   displacement   field   is   available,
for   instance   by   conventional   cross-correlation   analysis,
then  such  a  result  can  be  used  to  apply  the  convection
equation  to  the  scalar  intensity  field.   Then  the  subsequent
interrogation  is  still  performed  via  cross-correlation,   but
the  argument  functions  (the  particle  image  windows)  are
selected   in   such   a   way   that   the   image   matching   is
augmented.
The two-dimensional cross-correlation can be rewritten as
φfg (m, n) = 	
M


i,j=1
f i + upt
2    , j +
vpt
2    
×g i ? m ? upt
2    , j ? n ?
vpt
2     
× cov(f )cov(g)?1                                                                  (3.5)
where  up   and  vp   represent  the  components  of  the  spatial
(image)  velocity  distribution  as  obtained  by  means  of  the
previous image interrogation.
It should be remarked that when the inserted up  and vp
are the actual velocity components distribution,  then a peak
will  appear  exactly  at  the  origin  of  the  correlation  map  of
approximately unit value.
3.1.  Building the predictor displacement field
In  the  previous  discussion  the  Taylor  series  expansion  is
hypothesized  to  locally  describe  the  displacement  function
using  a  limited  number  of  parameters.     Figure  6  depicts
the  effect  of  the  first  three  terms  of  the  Taylor  expansion
R5
F Scarano
Table 1.  Parameters participating in the optimization procedure with increasing order of the series expansion.
Truncation order     0             1                       2
# Parameters (p)     2             6                       12
Yield                        u, v        u, v, ux , uy ,     u, v, ux , uy , vx , vy
vx , vy                     uxx , uxy , uyy , vxx , vxy , vyy
# Computations       (N2)2        (N2)6                       (N2)12
Figure 5.  Motion of a fluid element and tracers.
0th  o rd er                    1st  o rd er                    2n d  o rd er
Figure 6.  The effect of window deformation with a different
truncation order of the displacement distribution.
on  the  displacement  predictor,  and  therefore  on  the  relative
transformation of the correlating window.
Several methods are listed in the literature that make use
of such a displacement prediction. It is possible to establish a
classification depending on the order of the polynomial in the
Taylor expansion.
It  should  be  clear  that  the  ordinary  cross-correlation
method  reduces  to  the  case  of  d(r)   =   0  everywhere,
therefore no predictor displacement is applied a priori  when
the correlation is computed.
3.1.1.  Zero-order displacement predictor.     Two of the most
popular interrogation methods fall into this category:
(a)   One-step   direct   correlation   with   different   size   of   the
interrogation  window  and  search  area.      The  algorithm  is
described and performances are analysed in detail in several
studies (Adrian 1998, 1991, Keane and Adrian 1990, Fincham
and Spedding 1997, Westerweel 1997, 2000, Gui et al  2000,
2001).  In this case the translation displacement is accounted
for by the increased extent of the search area (figure 7) and
the problem of loss of pairs due to in-plane motion is partially
solved.  Among the advantages of the method are the simple
implementation and reliability as well as the low computational
cost.
(b) Multi-step cross-correlation with a discrete window offset
(Westerweel  et  al  1997).      The  displacement  prediction  is
obtained by a conventional cross-correlation analysis and the
result is applied uniformly to shift the interrogation windows
Figure 7.  Correlation window and search area (from Fincham and
Spedding (1997)).
one  with  respect  to  the  other.     The  method  significantly
improves the performances of ordinary cross-correlation with
a  higher  S/N  and  a  higher  measurement  precision.     An
additional  advantage  of  the  method  is  its  suitability  for  the
multigrid implementation (Scarano and Riethmuller 1999) that
allows one to improve the spatial resolution.
It  is  important  to  remark  that  applying  a  symmetric
window shift with respect to the interrogation location results
in  a  central  difference  interrogation  (CDI)  (Wereley  and
Meinhart 2000); see figure 8. Compared with the usual forward
shift  interrogation  (FDI),  such  a  scheme  has  the  advantage
of  being  second-order  time  accurate,  and  therefore  yields  a
considerable  improvement  when  a  large  time  delay  occurs
between exposures.
Therefore, the result of the correlation of the two windows
should be located on the mean position between the centre of
the interrogation window and that of the search window. This
method also has a relatively low computational cost which is
comparable to that of ordinary correlation (multiplied by the
number of iterations).
In terms of image deformation,  the above two methods
apply piecewise uniform displacement prediction to the whole
particle image recordings.
(c) Multi-step iterative sub-pixel window offset.     This method
is  a  variation  of  the  previously  mentioned  ones  in  that  the
value of the displacement predictor is not limited to integer
numbers.     As  a  dramatic  consequence,   when  displacing
the  interrogation  windows,  the  image  intensity  is  required
at  intermediate  locations  between  pixels.     Therefore,   an
image  interpolation  procedure  must  be  applied  in  order  to
retrieve the light intensity at those locations pointed to by the
displacement  predictor.   The  method  claims  a  considerable
improvement in precision and accuracy with an error level of
the  order  of  10?2  pixels,  as  assessed  with  synthetic  images
(Lecordier 1997). The image interpolation scheme becomes a
R6
Iterative image deformation methods in PIV
x
y
(b)
(b')
d
(b’)
(a’)
Interrogation. location
d
Figure 8.  Window shift method with FDI (left) and with CDI (right). Piecewise uniform displacement predictor distribution.
x
y
x
y
(a)
d
t0                                                                                              t0+?t
(b)                                     (b')
Figure 9.  Schematic illustration of the image transformation due to
linear in-plane motion. Particles follow the mean displacement d
(translation) and the local displacement gradient.
crucial aspect in such a procedure and it must be consistent
with  signal  theory.    Suitable  schemes  must  be  adopted  so
as  to  avoid  or  minimize  image  degradation  or  signal  loss
(Niblack  1986).     Common  choices  are  multidimensional
polinomial interpolation (bilinear biquadratic, bicubic splines)
and regression formulae such as least-squares biquadratic.
3.1.2.           Linear    displacement    predictor.         When    the
displacement  distribution  is  obtained  after  a  first  image
interrogation,    the    continuous    displacement    distribution
(piecewise linear) can be estimated using a two-dimensional
linear interpolation with respect to the interrogation grid points
(figure 9).
Huang  et   al   (1993b)  contributed  to  the  development
of  such  an  approach,  proposing  the  particle  pattern  image
distortion   (PID)   technique.        The   major   goal   of   the
technique   was   that   of   maximizing   the   effective   particle
image  pattern  (PIP)  matching  during  the  cross-correlation
analysis.    As  a  result,  the  technique  brought  a  significant
improvement,  enlarging  the  vorticity  dynamic  range  with
respect to conventional cross-correlation.  The work is widely
referred to in subsequent literature studies that followed similar
approaches.   The  authors  showed  that  the  distortion  of  the
interrogation window allowed the measurement of the particle
image displacement over a larger range of the velocity gradient
with  respect  to  the  traditional  correlation.    The  maximum
velocity  gradient  measured  was  55.3  s?1   (1.1  pixel/pixel
deformation rate) compared with 15 s?1  (0.5 pixel/pixel) from
Willert and Gharib (1991). However, the analysis of synthetic
images of a simulated Oseen vortex yielded a measurement
uncertainty  of  about  0.25  pixels,  which  is  relatively  high,
presumably due to the low-accuracy centroid scheme used for
the determination of the correlation peak sub-pixel location.
The  results  obtained  on  a  water  flow  past  a  backward-
facing step (Reh  = 4000) with a comparison of PIV and the
PIP method are reported in figure 10.   Clearly it is possible
to enlarge the range of the measurable velocity gradient.  The
effectiveness of the image distortion procedure is proven by
the higher S/N level (consequently a lower yield of spurious
vectors) in the highly sheared/vortical region downstream of
the separation point.  In comparison, the conventional cross-
correlation for a given choice of the S/N threshold fails in the
region of higher vorticity.
However,   the  method  was  implemented  with  a  high
computational cost since there was a high resolution associated
with  the  dense  data  spacing  obtained  by  means  of  a  large
overlap between adjacent windows.
Moreover,   a   relatively   simple   image   reconstruction
scheme (bilinear interpolation) and the sub-pixel correlation
peak  fit  (centroid)  are  considered  inaccurate  for  the  image
resampling  and  for  the  correlation  peak  location  estimate,
as  was  demonstrated  in  later  studies  (Westerweel  1993,
Louren，
co  1996).   Therefore,  the  above  implementation  did
not completely succeed in exploiting the benefit of the image
deformation philosophy in terms of measurement precision.
A method similar to PID was proposed by Jambunathan
et al (1995) who also evaluated the method’s performance by
means of synthetic PIV images with a known particle image
displacement.
The  choice  of  the  displacement  distribution  to  test  the
method  performance  was  made  on  the  basis  of  physical
considerations;  namely,  the  Helmoltz  velocity  theory  was
invoked that divides the movement of a fluid element into three
subsidiary terms:
V (r) = V0  + 21 V δr + ∇φ                  (3.6)
where V (r) is the velocity distribution across the fluid element.
The  three  terms  in  the  right-hand  side  of  the  equation  are
translation, rotation and bi-axial shear, respectively.
The  two  most  important  outcomes  were  that  (a)  the
measurement accuracy can be improved from a factor of 2 to
5 using the image deformation method and (b) the correlation
peak height is weakly dependent of the in-plane displacement
distribution.
The  assessment  of  the  method  returned  a  measurement
error  level  of  only  0.02  pixels  on  synthetic  particle  images
with a uniform displacement.  Although much emphasis was
given to the pattern matching algorithm, the image re-sampling
process  was  performed  with  a  bilinear  interpolation,  which
has  a  relatively  low  accuracy  compared  with  higher-order
interpolation schemes.
R7
F Scarano
Figure 10.  Comparison between results as obtained with the conventional (left) and the PID technique (right) for the measurement of the
water flow downstream of a backward-facing step (Huang et al 1993).
A   method   referred   to   as   window   (displacement)
deformation iterative multigrid (WIDIM) has been proposed
by the author on the trend-line of the PID method.   Several
points of improvement were exploited concerning the accuracy
of the correlation sub-pixel interpolation (three-point Gaussian
fit)  and  the  image  interpolation  scheme  (two-dimensional
cardinal interpolation formula with Whittaker reconstruction
(Pratt 1978)).   Moreover,  the method demonstrated that the
image  distortion  technique  could  be  successfully  combined
with  multigrid  interrogation  with  the  progressive  window
refinement method.  The method’s performance was assessed
by means of synthetic PIV images.  The results showed that
an error level below 10?2  pixels could be obtained. A detailed
description of the results is provided in the remainder of this
paper.
3.2.  Higher-order methods
Tokumaru and Dimotakis (1995) investigated an image anal-
ysis  technique  referred  to  as  correlation  image  velocime-
try (CIV). The authors adopted a method that utilizes the con-
cepts of domain transformation defined on the basis of the im-
age flow mapping with correlation.  The global optimization
process that relies on the minimization (in a least-square sense)
of a Lagrangian operator properly defined was implemented.
The expression of the optimization process reads as
min
ξ(x,t0), ξ(x,t1)V  {
c1[ξ (x, t1)] ? c0[ξ (x, t0)]}2  + σ2 d2x.
(3.7)
An appropriate choice of the smoothing function, σ2 is needed.
Here   ξ(x, t0)  and   ξ(x, t1)  represent   the   Lagrangian
displacement field at two subsequent time instants while c(ξ) is
the transported  scalar field.  The present method restricts the
form of the displacement field to a truncated (Taylor) series
approximation (equation (3.4)).  As previously remarked, the
higher the order of the approximating series the larger is the
number of parameters to be considered in the optimization, and
therefore the computational cost increases exponentially with
the series order.
The  validity  of  such  a  method  was  assessed  in  the
application   to   laboratory   flows   (Couette   flow   between
concentric cylinders, cylinder-wake flow (figure 11)) as well
as atmospheric flows (Voyager images of Jupiter).
Such  an  interrogation  method  is  conceived  to  perform
a  global  optimization  of  the  correlation  coefficient  in  a
multidimensional  space  where  not  only  the  displacement
component are considered as optimization parameters but also
the local spatial derivatives of the displacement.
The CIV technique lists several advantages with respect to
a basic correlation method: (a) a multi-dimensional correlation
function  locally  estimates  the  velocity  and  the  deformation
rate, (b) the method is suitable for the analysis of a generic
tracer  motion  and  the  tracer  pattern  does  not  need  to  be  of
particle  type  as  is  common  in  PIV  and  (c)  a  higher  spatial
resolution can be achieved since the velocity derivatives and
the associated relevant flow quantities (vorticity,  strain-rate,
divergence)  are  measured  at  each  independent  interrogation
spot.     In  comparison,   ordinary  cross-correlation  analysis
requires  the  velocity  derivatives  to  be  estimated  by  finite
differences of the velocity data evaluated at neighbouring grid
locations. However, a detailed assessment of the CIV method
has not been performed.
A  recent  study  (Ruan  et  al  2001)  proposes  to  perform
the  optimization  process  previously  described  at  a  lower
computational  cost  by  means  of  local  rather  than  global
optimization. The method is referred to as direct measurement
of  vorticity  (DMV)  and  performs  the  direct  evaluation  of
the  vorticity  from  the  analysis  of  the  image  flow  rotation.
The vorticity is associated to the PIP rotation, therefore after
the polar coordinates transform,  the cross-correlation of the
transformed  PIP  yields  directly  the  local  rate  of  rotation.
Figure  12  shows  the  PIP  in  the  physical  x?y  plane  and  its
mapped  counterpart  MPIP  after  the  transformation  in  polar
coordinates r??. A rotation in the x?y plane corresponds to a
simple translation in polar coordinates, which can be evaluated
applying the cross-correlation operator.
The main advantages of the method are a higher spatial
resolution and the de-coupling of the measurement error of
velocity and vorticity.  In fact, small errors on the velocity do
not directly affect the evaluation of the vorticity.
The  performance  assessment  on  synthetic  images  of
an Oseen-vortex displacement distribution yielded promising
results  with  a  noise  level  of  the  DMV  method  comparable
to  that  coming  from  conventional  PIV  results  and  finite
differences.
Fincham and Delerce (1999) proposed an advanced CIV
technique. The method called peak anti-aliasing spline trans-
formed interrogation scheme (PASTIS) was conceived in par-
ticular  to  minimize  peak  locking  effects.   The  scheme  was
based on a small interrogation region to be correlated with a
R8
Iterative image deformation methods in PIV
Figure 11.  Cylinder-wake flow. (a) Initial placement of series expansion neighbourhood, each square denotes a control volume;
(b) displacement of grid after 100 ms, estimated using the nonlinear correlation process; (c) displacement of centres of grid over 100 ms
(Tokumaru and Dimotakis 1995).
y
r
x
(0, r0)
(0,0)
(r0, ?0)
?
Figure 12.  A PIP in x?y plane (left), and its mapped pattern MPIP
in r?? plane (Ruan et al 2001).
larger search area.  After each iteration a progressive refine-
ment of the spatial resolution is applied.   The displacement
field distribution is estimated with an earlier interrogation from
which the image transformation is applied such that the search
box  is  centred  on  the  predicted  location  prior  to  evaluating
again the residual displacement by correlation.  The distorted
image is reconstructed by means of a two-dimensional spline
scheme.
The  method  shows  interesting  performances  (assessed
with synthetic images of known displacement distribution) in
terms of spatial resolution, and dynamic range of velocity and
vorticity.
The  authors  report  that  most  of  the  RMS  error  in  the
basic algorithm is due to the deformation of the continuum.
The uncertainty level is drastically reduced when the image
distortion  is  applied,  as  shown  in  figure  13.   Conversely,  it
seems evident that most of the peak locking error linked to the
pixelization of the images is compensated when the latter are
treated with a fractional offset procedure.
A  performance  assessment  with  synthetic  images  of  a
DNS flow field was also proposed, showing the global impact
of the method on the measurement in turbulent flows. Clearly,
the measurement precision benefits from the introduction of
the continuous domain transformation, as shown in figure 14.
Quenot   et   al    (1998)   proposed   an   approach   based
on    orthogonal    dynamic    programming    (ODP).    Optical
flow  computation  consists  of  evaluating  the  displacement
distribution  from  a  sequence  of  images  on  the  assumption
that the image intensity is conserved during the motion.  The
technique  introduced  by  Quenot  (1992)  as  the  orthogonal
dynamic  programming  (ODP-PIV)  algorithm  represents  an
extension  of  the  technique  for  the  detection  of  sub-pixel
displacements from a pair of single-exposure PIV recordings.
The  DP  algorithm  that  performs  image  strip  matching  was
derived from a speech recognition algorithm where segments
of  a  speech  signal  are  transformed  into  a  two-dimensional
(time?frequency) strip representation.
Instead   of   the   square   interrogation   boxes   used   in
conventional  cross-correlation  analysis,   the  ODP  method
performs the matching by strip-to-strip comparison between
the  two  images.    The  images  are  sliced  into  parallel  and
overlapping  strips  (figure  15).     Corresponding  strips  are
aligned and the matching is performed minimizing the relative
Minkowsky  distance  (in  the  present  case  L1)  between  the
strips.   A  global  image  matching  constraint  is  applied  that
enhances the methods robustness.  Performing several passes
with  orthogonal  slicing  directions  solves  the  problem  of
matching two-dimensional image strips.
Several advantages are reported in such an approach with
respect to the cross-correlation method:  (a) the interrogation
returns  a  dense  displacement  field  (it  is  possible  to  obtain
the  displacement  at  each  single  pixel);  (b)  the  method  is
suitable  to  analyse  sequences  of  more  than  two  images;
(c)  the  global  image  matching  is  performed  that  enforces
data continuity yielding a more robust measurement; (d) local
correlation is iterated over regions at high velocity, improving
the measurement accuracy.
The results of the analysis on synthetic PIV images report
of error level of 0.5 pixels for an image pair and of 0.2 pixels
for four images.
Lin   and   Perlin   (1998)   applied   the   concept   of   sub-
pattern  (smaller  than  the  interrogation  window)  analysis  to
the  interrogation  of  PIV  recordings  with  a  large  velocity
gradient.  Although iterative methods showed that significant
improvements can be achieved in terms of spatial resolution
and  accuracy,  nevertheless  most  of  them  relied  on  a  proper
displacement  field  estimate  to  be  obtained  by  means  of
conventional cross-correlation.
When the velocity gradient is larger than allowed for in
the first interrogation (e.g. when dealing with a boundary layer
flow), then a proper velocity and velocity gradient estimate will
not be available in that region and the first-step interrogation
will not provide for a suitable predictor.  As a consequence,
the  whole  iterative  method  will  not  progress  towards  the
measurement over the specified region.
R9
F Scarano
0.10
Mean bias error (peak-locking)
RMS error around mean
True rms error
Mean bias error (peak-locking)
RMS error around mean
True rms error
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
? 0.02
? 0.04
? 0.06
? 0.08
? 0.10
? 0.50         ? 0.25           0.00            0.25           0.50                  ? 0.50          ? 0.25          0.00            0.25            0.50
0.015
0.010
0.005
0.000
? 0.005
? 0.010
? 0.015
Fractional displacement (pixels)                                              Actual fractional displacement (pixels)
E (pixels)
E (pixels)
Figure 13.  Error as a function of the actual fractional displacement for CIV algorithms. (Left) Basic CIV; (right) CIV with PASTIS and
deformation. Remark: vertical axes have different scales (Fincham and Delerce 2000).
Figure 14.  Vorticity field from DNS particle simulation. Left: actual vorticity; centre: standard CIV analysis (10242  pixels image, 152  pixels
windows); right: CIV analysis with PASTIS and deformation (Fincham and Delerce 2000).
End line
m                                              i
0
0
Strip 1                  Strip 2
Strip 3
Image 0 strip k
Strip k of image 0
Strip k of image 1
Image 1 strip k
p
p
j
1
1
Begin line
Figure 15.  Dynamic programming. Image strips (top left); strip alignment (bottom left); image strips and the matching path (right).
As  discussed  by  Keane  and  Adrian  (1990)  and  Keane
et al  (1995) some criteria have to be fulfilled to optimize the
interrogation  of  a  velocity  field  by  correlation  analysis.   In
particular, a minimum number of particle images (at least 12)
must be present in the interrogation window (image density).
At  the  same  time,  the  maximum  velocity  gradient  has  a
maximum value given by
∂∂u
x t <
d
D                            (3.8)
where t is the time separation between the two exposures, D
is the window size and d is the mean particle image diameter.
Finally, the one-quarter rule is suggested to limit the loss
of pairs due to in-plane motion.
Often one or more of the above criteria cannot be satisfied
in certain flow regions because the minimum window size (with
respect to the minimum number of particle images) is too large
with respect to the constraint on the velocity gradient. Thus, the
iterative process fails at its start and never converges. The sub-
pattern interrogation method proposed by Lin and Perlin makes
use  of  sub-interrogation  windows  smaller  than  the  original
interrogation window, circumventing the difficulty in fulfilling
the optimality criteria.
R10
Iterative image deformation methods in PIV
The method combines the information obtained from the
analysis  at  sub-pattern  level  to  extract  a  suitable  prediction
of the velocity gradient within the entire correlation window
(figure  16).   The  prediction  is  therefore  given  as  the  linear
image  distortion.    The  performance  assessment  made  with
synthetic images shows that the restriction on large velocity
gradient is significantly relaxed as compared with conventional
cross-correlation.
4.  Sub-pixel interpolation
4.1.  Particle image sub-pixel interpolation
PIV  interrogation  methods  that  employ  a  continuous  image
displacement   distribution   require   an   image   re-sampling
process that yields the image intensity at intermediate locations
between the pixel array.
It has to be remarked that the image re-sampling process
is  a  crucial  step  for  the  appropriate  reconstruction  of  the
image  signal  (Pratt  1978).     A  variety  of  interpolation  or
regression  methods  that  may  be  applied  from  the  simplest
linear interpolation to more refined schemes. A suitable image
interpolation method should avoid loss of information in the
re-sampling process.
In  the  present  discussion  several  schemes  have  been
introduced.  However, one should bear in mind that the PIV
image signal spectrum has a major component on the high-
frequency  side.    Therefore,  the  adopted  scheme  requires  a
spectral  response  that  respects  the  constraints  coming  from
sampling theory, i.e. the Nyquist criterion.
Two-dimensional linear interpolation is therefore inappro-
priate  and  higher-order  polynomial  forms  are  preferred,  al-
though they require a larger computational cost.
The cardinal function interpolation formula (Hall 1979)
fulfils the above prerequisite:
R (x, y) =
i=+∞
i 

=?∞
j=?∞
j

=?∞
f (i, j)
×sin [π (i ? x)]
π (i ? x)
sin [π (j ? y)]
π (j ? y)    .                            (4.1)
Here, R(x, y) represents the image intensity retrieved at a sub-
pixel  location  ([x, y]  ∈  ?2) from  the  discrete  image  array
f (i, j).   From the image sampling theory this interpolation
allows reconstruction of the image without loss of information
if the original signal (image) has been sampled according to
the Nyquist criterion.
Clearly,  the  reconstruction  scheme  cannot  be  applied
following the above equation since the sinc function continues
to both positive and negative infinity. Therefore, only a limited
number of neighbouring pixels are considered, resulting in a
truncated-sinc  filter  kernel  and  the  summation  is  computed
over M + 1 points in each direction. The computational effort
for the image interpolation increases with the square of M and it
can be fairly intensive when M > 6.  However, the truncated-
sinc  filter  response  shows  excessive  ripple  in  the  pass-band
(Gibbs effect) resulting from the abrupt discontinuity at the
ends of the truncated sinc function.
A simple method of improving the response consists in
the multiplication of the truncated-sinc by a Hamming or a
Blackman window (Niblack 1986).  The idea is to reduce the
(a)                               (b)                               (c)
(d )                              (e)                               ( f )
Figure 16.  Step-by-step results of the sub-pattern PIV procedure.
(a) Interrogation window (large square) and sub-pattern windows;
(b) candidate set of displacement vectors (small squares) and related
interrogation window deformation; (c) sub-pattern ‘2’
cross-correlation map; (d) full-size distorted interrogation window;
(e) different choice of sub-pattern windows for further iterations;
(f ) cross-correlation signal after window distortion.
abruptness of the truncated ends.  When the truncated-sinc is
windowed by a smooth function, a smooth frequency response
is returned:
w (i) = 0.54 ? 0.46 cos (2πi/M)
(1D Hamming window)
w (i) = 0.42 ? 0.5 cos (2πi/M) + 0.08 cos (4πi/M)
(1D Blackman window).
(4.2)
4.2.  Correlation peak sub-pixel interpolation
Since the precision of the measurement is directly linked to
that  of  the  peak  location  in  the  correlation  map,  it  is  clear
that  the  structure  of  the  correlation  map  as  a  whole  and  in
particular that of the peak were the subject of well-focused
studies.   Since the introduction of peak fitting functions for
sub-pixel displacement estimates (Willert and Gharib 1991), a
number of anomalies were progressively found from analytical
and  numerical  studies  concerned  with  the  accuracy  of  the
fractional displacement estimators.
The  three  most  frequently  reported  peak  interpolation
or  fitting  schemes  are  the  centroid,  parabolic  and  Gaussian
(based  on  a  three-by-three  pixels  kernel).     The  accuracy
of  the  fractional  displacement  estimate  associated  with  the
above schemes has been widely studied and detailed results
from theoretical and numerical investigations were given by
Westerweel  (1993),  Louren，
co  (1996),  Raffel  et  al  (1998),
Nogueira et al (1999) among others.
More sophisticated schemes that involve two-dimensional
interpolation or convolution reconstruction were also widely
investigated (Ronnerberger et al 1998, Louren，
co 1999, Sugii
et al 2000).  In some cases it appeared that the existing forms
of  systematic  error  of  the  fractional  displacement  initially
ascribed to an improper peak fit method were to be found in
the structure of the discrete correlation map itself (Westerweel
1997, Fincham and Delerce 2000).
R11
F Scarano
-0.4          -0.2             0              0.2            0.4
Fractional displacement [pixels]
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
Fractional error [pixels]
no interp.
Centroid
Parabolic
Gaussian
Figure 17.  Tracking error ε??ε for common peak-fit functions and
for the closest integer estimate (no interpolation). Vertical lines
indicate the typical RMS uncertainty of cross-correlation analysis.
Commonly it was found that for cross-correlation analysis
a  main  bias  term  underestimates  the  displacement  with  a
periodic behaviour of one pixel wavelength.  It was clear that
the  source  of  this  kind  of  error  must  be  sought  for  in  the
image  pixelization  and  in  the  consequent  discrete  nature  of
the correlation signal.
Several arguments help clarify the periodic error of one
pixel  wavelength  that  occurs  when  we  try  to  recover  sub-
pixel information from the correlation table.  As discussed by
Westerweel (1993), for a typical choice of the peak fit function
(three-point Gaussian) the fractional error pattern resembles
that outlined in figure 17 where the centroid and the parabolic
scheme are also plotted for comparison.
In  this  example,  the  Gaussian  scheme  shows  the  best
performance.  This result is confirmed by several authors and
implicitly supported by the broad application of the Gaussian
scheme in the research community.
Independently  of  the  interpolating  function,  the  error
vanishes when the fractional displacement approaches zero. If
no interpolation scheme is used, the error equals the fractional
displacement, thus it is maximized at ±0.5 pixels. In this case
the displacement values are locked  at integer values because
the returned domain is given by the integer numbers.
Adopting an interpolation scheme still shows a bias of the
displacement estimate towards integer values.   In particular,
the effects are visible when field quantities such as vorticity
or rate of strain are displayed which amplify the measurement
noise.  Although the peak locking effect occurs with a regular
pattern, it is not possible to remove it a posteriori, subtracting
it from the measured value. In fact, the unknown phase of the
error is embedded into the random noise.
The above problem can be properly treated with methods
that try to compensate for this form of error.
If  the  exact  particle  displacement  is  known,   then  a
local  shift  can  be  applied  between  the  correlating  areas
before evaluating the correlation.  Therefore a zero fractional
displacement is obtained and the associated bias error vanishes.
However, since the actual particle image displacement is not
known  a  priori,  only  a  prediction  can  be  assumed  to  be
available from a previous interrogation.  Thus, the behaviour
of the displacement estimate should be investigated when a
relative offset is applied between the two correlating windows
with the precision of a displacement predictor.   Assessment
of  cross-correlation  performances  widely  reported  in  the
literature  (Huang  et   al   1997,   Raffel  et   al   1998)  over  a
wide  range  of  simulation  parameters  shows  that  in  typical
conditions  (32 × 32  pixel  window,  five  pixel  displacement,
ten particle/window, moderate gradient) the RMS error εr does
not exceed one-tenth of a pixel.
The   improvement   in   accuracy   can   be   estimated   by
comparing the error due to the periodic bias (peak  locking)
effect with discrete window offset and that associated with a
sub-pixel window offset method.
The fractional displacement can be modelled as a variable
with  uniform  distribution  between  +0.5  and  ?0.5,  thus  the
RMS tracking error εb′  is defined as follows:
εb′  ≡ 
+1/2
?1/2
(ε? ? ε)2 dε.                    (4.3)
For the Gaussian peak-fit εb′  = 0.062.  After the application
of  the  sub-pixel  window  offset  it  can  be  assumed  that  the
residual displacement is a statistical variable with zero mean
and  uniform  distribution  with  an  amplitude  given  by  εb′.
Consequently, the expression of the residual peak locking bias
in the case of sub-pixel window offset becomes
εb′? ≡ 21
εr 
+εb′
?εb′
(ε? ? ε)2 dε.                 (4.4)
Thus, depending on the RMS uncertainty, this form of error
can be reduced significantly, while its upper limit is given by
the peak locking error given by the discrete window offset. For
the Gaussian peak fit, εb′? = 0.011.
According to this model procedure the bias error on the
displacement estimate becomes negligible in comparison with
the random error.
Algorithms that use such a technique imply that the image
has  to  be  reconstructed  in  order  to  retrieve  the  grey-level
intensity at fractional locations.
Among  the  works  that  proposed  the  fractional  window
offset  is  that  of  Lecordier  (1997),  which  also  reorients  the
interrogation  windows  to  minimize  the  velocity  difference
due  to  the  velocity  gradient.     Results  were  shown  from
simulated  PIV  images  reporting  RMS  uncertainties  of  the
order of 10?2  pixel.  However, the computational load of the
method is significantly increased due to two factors:  (1) the
interrogation  was  performed  multiple  times  since  several
iterations  are  performed  for  the  result  to  converge;  (2)  the
image   reconstruction   by   interpolation   is   computationally
intensive.
5.  Spatial resolution
The spatial resolution of the interrogation method is clearly
related to the minimum size of the correlation window (Keane
et  al   1995)  that  can  be  used  in  the  image  interrogation.
Decreasing  the  size  of  the  interrogation  spot  is  known  to
be  a  common  procedure  to  improve  the  spatial  resolution.
R12
Iterative image deformation methods in PIV
However,  it  is  well  known  that  by  decreasing  the  number
of particle images per interrogation window (image density),
the  amount  of  information  is  also  reduced  and  the  result  is
more susceptible to both random correlation peaks (lower S/N,
Keane and Adrian 1990, Prasad et al 1992) and random errors
in the sub-pixel peak interpolation.
Larger interrogation windows are more robust and when
the  velocity  gradient  is  sufficiently  small  they  can  provide
very  accurate  sub-pixel  displacements.   However,  when  the
length  scale  of  the  velocity  fluctuations  is  smaller  than  the
interrogation window the interrogation performs poorly.
Since the size of the interrogation window is limited by
the particle average spacing, a high seeding density is desirable
to attain a lower spatial wavelength cut-off.
The spatial response of the cross-correlation is similar to
that of a spatial low-pass filter with top-hat distribution.  For
such a linear filter it is possible to define a modulation transfer
function  (Willert  and  Gharib  1991).   The  latter  assumption
was  verified  using  synthetic  PIV  images  with  sinusoidal
displacement distribution (Scarano and Riethmuller 2000a) as
it is shown in figure 21.
Clearly,  a  faithful  reconstruction  of  the  velocity  spatial
fluctuations  can  be  obtained  when  the  window  size  does
not  exceed  20%  of  the  spatial  wavelength  of  the  velocity
distribution. Conversely, it is remarkable that a window size of
only half the spatial wavelength returns a signal that is reduced
to 60% of the original peak.
In  several  cases  it  is  often  unclear  whether  it  is  more
important  to  resolve  the  small  flow  scales  at  the  cost  of  an
increased  measurement  noise  or  to  obtain  a  low-pass  flow
representation with a higher smoothness.  In the first case the
data set is not directly suitable for differentiation and low-pass
filtering will be needed anyway.
Further suggestions to improve the spatial resolution have
been proposed in the literature, namely hybrid methods that
combine  the  robust  pattern  matching  capability  of  cross-
correlation together with the large data/particle yield, which
is typical of individual particle tracking techniques.  Such an
approach proposed by Keane et al  (1995) under the name of
super-resolution PIV has led to several developments (Cowen
and  Monismith  1996,   van  der  Plas  and  Bastiaans  1998,
Ishikawa et  al  2000, Takehara et  al  2000, Wernet 2001 and
others).   However,  the  PTV  technique  and  related  methods
will not be discussed in the present context.
Among the super-resolution methods, sub-pattern interro-
gation can also be mentioned (Lin and Perlin 1998, Nogueira
et al 2001, Louren，
co and Krothapalli 1998).
6.  An iterative image deformation interrogation
algorithm
The remainder of this paper describes in detail the practical
implementation  of  the  WIDIM  iterative  image  distortion
interrogation algorithm (Scarano and Riethmuller 1998).
The technique is based on the PID methodology proposed
by Huang et  al  (1993) and is implemented as a hierarchical
scheme that allows a progressive refinement of the window
size. As a result, the method progressively compensates for the
in-plane flow motion at smaller scale iteration after iteration.
The  application  of  hierarchical  schemes  for  the  multi-
resolution  analysis  of  PIV  images  is  currently  widespread
and   although   different   approaches   are   proposed   for   its
implementation,   there   is   a   general   agreement   about   its
effectiveness (Kumar and Banerjee 1998, Fincham and Delerce
2000, Nogueira et al 2000).
A brief description of the basic principle of the method is
as follows:
(1)  The  PIV  images  are  interrogated  with  a  basic  cross-
correlation  method  with  a  relatively  coarse  grid.    The
window size is chosen so as to fulfil the basic interrogation
criteria such as the one-quarter rule. Results are validated
so as to not include spurious data in further steps.
(2)  The result of the correlation is used to build a predictor
displacement field over all the image pixels.  A bilinear
interpolation is used for this purpose.
(3)  The two images are deformed according to the predictor
spatial distribution.   Since both the images compensate
for half of the displacement, the measurement is centred
on  the  original  pixel  location,  resulting  in  a  second-
order accurate estimate of the displacement.  The image
deformation involves the re-sampling of the pixel values
at  intermediate  locations,  therefore  an  interpolation  is
applied (cardinal function interpolation formula).
(4)  The interrogation window size is reduced according to a
pre-defined refinement step.
(5)  The images are interrogated, yielding a displacement field
with a finer resolution.
(6)  The velocity result is validated with respect to prescribed
criteria.
(7)  The  validated  velocity  distribution  is  then  used  as  a
final  output  or  as  an  iterative  input  to  point  (2).    The
interrogation  process  is  repeated  until  a  convergence
criterion is satisfied.
6.1.  Performance assessment
To  assess  in  detail  the  performance  of  the  algorithm  a
systematic analysis was carried out by means of a reference
particle image displacement field applied to synthetic particle
images.    Particles’  light  imaging  and  tracers’  motion  were
simulated  to  build  benchmark  PIV  images.   Different  types
of   displacement   distribution   were   investigated:     uniform
translation,  uniform  shear  and  sinusoidal  displacement.    A
detailed description of the simulation is given in Scarano and
Riethmuller (2000).
Particle images with a Gaussian profile were artificially
generated  at  locations  randomly  distributed  in  space.    The
pixel  intensity  level  (I   ∈    [0, 1 . . . 255])  was  obtained  by
integration  of  the  Gaussian  distribution  over  a  virtual  array
sensor  (pixel  fill  factor  1.0).    Particle  peak  intensity  and
diameter  were  also  modelled  as  random  variables  (Ip    =
80, σIp   =  80;  dp   =  2 pixels, σdp   =  1).  A particle density
of 0.10 particle/pixel was obtained generating 6554 particles
over an array of 256 × 256 pixels.
The  spatial  wavelength  response  of  the  technique  was
tested over a reference sinusoidal displacement distribution.
Different sizes of the interrogation window were tested.  The
sinusoidal displacement distribution is uniform along the x-
coordinate  of  amplitude  A  =  2  pixels  and  wavelength  (
R13
F Scarano
varying  in  the  range  from  8  to  128  pixels.    The  reference
response  was  assumed  to  be  that  of  a  single  low-pass  filter
(moving average) with a rectangular window of the same size
as the interrogation spot.
6.2.  Results
Figure   20   shows   the   mean   displacement   error   pattern
associated   with   different   correlation-based   interrogation
procedures  when  a  uniform  displacement  is  applied.    The
systematic  underestimation  for  the  conventional  correlation
(labelled with triangles) agrees with Westerweel (1993) and
Raffel  et  al  (1998).    The  discrete  window  offset  method
(labelled  with  squares)  compensates  for  this  effect,  but  it
suffers  from  a  periodic  bias  associated  with  the  fractional
displacement.    Moreover,  the  offset  at  the  closest  integer
introduces  a  discontinuity  when  the  fractional  displacement
equals  0.5  pixels.   The  bias  error  associated  with  the  sub-
pixel  window  offset  procedure  (labelled  with  diamonds)  is
significantly smaller since it keeps below 5 × 10?3  pixels.
The  behaviour  of  the  RMS  error  is  one  of  the  most
important outcomes of the simulation (figure 1, right).
The data series related to the basic cross-correlation lies
at  about  0.1  pixels,  while  the  multigrid  iterative  discrete
offset   technique   yields   a   result   about   half   an   order   of
magnitude below.   Considering a displacement of ten pixels
as  the  reference  maximum  displacement,  the  discrete  offset
technique yields a dynamic range of 2.5 orders of magnitude.
When  the  fractional  window  displacement  is  applied,  the
error is drastically reduced at about 10?3  pixels resulting in
a dynamic range of almost four orders of magnitude.
7.  Towards adaptive resolution
The  method  discussed  in  the  previous  section  shows  the
potential  of  hierarchical  schemes  yielding  multigrid  flow
image analysis. However, the progressive window refinement
is applied uniformly over the entire image and it is therefore
independent of the local flow features.
When dealing with highly inhomogeneous flows (shear
flows, compressible flows) a high spatial resolution might be
required only in some parts of the investigated domain, whereas
large parts of the flow might require information with lower
spatial density.
In terms of signal analysis, it is desirable that the spatial
response of the interrogation method be adapted with respect to
the spatial scale of the signal to be analysed (namely, velocity
distribution).
Recalling the diagram in figure 18, it is desirable to apply
a window size that is proportional to the wavelength of the
spatial velocity fluctuations.
The  method  proposed  herein  aims  at  suppressing  the
unnecessary  constraint  that  the  interrogation  window  size
should  be  constant  over  the  whole  domain  of  analysis.
Similarly to what is obtained in the field of computational fluid
dynamics (CFD), with solution adaptive domain discretization
with  unstructured  meshing,  the  measurement  or  evaluation
points  should  be  chosen  with  a  density  according  to  the
wavelength of the local spatial velocity fluctuations.
0              0.2            0.4            0.6            0.8              1
Normalised window size Ws/Λ
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Modulation coefficient
Moving avg
162  px, window offset
162  px, window def.
322  px, window offset
322  px, window def.
Figure 18.  Spatial response of the correlation analysis to a
sinusoidal displacement distribution.
The   local   radius   of   curvature   r(x, y)   of   the   scalar
velocity distribution gives a suitable description of the spatial
wavelength of the velocity fluctuation ((x, y).  The velocity
components  are  regarded  as  functions  of  two  independent
variables:  the spatial coordinates.   Therefore,  the minimum
local curvature radius is given by the inverse of the maximum
eigenvalue of the Hessian matrix Hu(x, y) defined as
Hu (x, y) =  uuxx      uxy
yx      uyy 
.                  (7.1)
For a non-singular matrix the eigenvalues problem yields
λ2  ? λ(uxx  + uyy) ? ux2y  = 0
λ1,2  = uxx  + uyy
2        ± 
uxx  + uyy
2       
2
? ux2y.
(7.2)
Finally the local curvature radius is expressed by
r (x, y) = max {1
λ1, λ2}.                    (7.3)
For a sinusoidal displacement distribution the relation between
the spatial wavelength and the curvature radius is
( = 2π√r.                             (7.4)
According to a linear response of the spatial cross-correlation
operator (Scarano and Riethmuller 2000) the effect of spatial
modulation depends on the ratio between the window linear
size Ws  and spatial wavelength ( of the velocity fluctuation.
A linear relation can be applied between ( and the local
spatial sampling length expressed in terms of the mean distance
h between neighbouring interrogation points:
h = a + b(.                             (7.5)
The window linear size Ws  and the sampling length are related
through the window overlap factor OF  = 1 ? h/Ws.  Once
the window overlap (typically 50 or 75%) has been chosen it is
R14
Iterative image deformation methods in PIV
Figure 19.  Multigrid image deformation method. Top left: interrogation grid and result of cross-correlation on the coarse grid; top right:
image deformation at the resolution of the coarse grid; bottom left: image deformation at the resolution of the refined grid; bottom right:
interrogation grid and result of cross-correlation on the refined grid.
0          0.5          1          1.5          2          2.5          3
Displacement [pixels]
-0.15
-0.10
-0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Displacement mean error [pixels]
Figure 20.  Mean displacement error as a function of the
displacement for different window sizes and interrogation
procedures. Full symbols 32 × 32 pixels and empty symbols
16 × 16 pixels analysis: basic cross-correlation;     discrete
window offset; iterative multigrid window deformation.
Corresponding RMS error is given in figure 1, right (Scarano and
Riethmuller 2000).
possible to establish a direct relation between the local velocity
fluctuation wavelength and the interrogation window size:
Ws  = 1a + b(
? OF .                          (7.6)
The  constant  a  is  determined  by  the  minimum  size  of  the
interrogation window size.   This parameter is related to the
size and the spatial density (in pixels) of the particle images.
Typically  a  ∈  [8, 32]  pixels.    Conversely,  the  constant  b
expresses the direct relation between the spatial wavelength
of  the  velocity  fluctuations  and  the  spatial  response  of  the
interrogation element.  The choice b < 1 yields a modulation
effect below 5%.
0              0.2            0.4            0.6            0.8             1
Normalised window size Ws/Λ
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Modulation coefficient
moving avg
Gaussian window (σ=Ws/4)
top-hat window correlation
Gaussian window correlation
AR rectangular window
Figure 21.  Spatial response of the AR correlation analysis for a
sinusoidal displacement distribution.
The whole technique relies on the knowledge of the actual
velocity spatial distribution, which is not known a priori and
which  is  the  objective  of  the  measurement  procedure  itself.
Therefore,  the  above  concepts  of  adaptive  spatial  sampling
density and interrogation window size are implemented in the
image  analysis  technique  within  a  recursive  structure.   The
result of each single interrogation is used as an input to evaluate
the interrogation parameters for the subsequent iteration. The
process  terminates  either  when  a  convergence  criterion  is
fulfilled or after a prescribed number of iterations.  Typically
after five iterations the results reached convergence, and further
iterations do not add any significant accuracy improvement.
When the method is applied to a sinusoidal displacement
R15
F Scarano
Figure 22.  Image analysis with the iterative adaptive resolution scheme: random interrogation locations chosen at the beginning of the
process (top left); velocity vector distribution from cross-correlation (top right); refined and adapted interrogation points distribution at the
third iteration (bottom left); velocity vector distribution from cross-correlation (bottom right). Dense areas correspond to smaller
interrogation windows.
field, the response of the adaptive resolution method can be
evaluated  in  terms  of  spatial  modulation.   Figure  21  shows
the results from the sinusoidal displacement simulation.  The
modulation  transfer  function  of  rectangular  and  Gaussian
linear filter (σ = Ws/4) is also plotted for reference.
The  data  series  relative  to  the  local  refinement  method
shows that it is possible to minimize the modulation effect;
nevertheless, such a process must take into account the lower
limit for the window size.
7.1.  Experimental assessment
Completeness requires that the proposed method performance
be  evaluated  over  real  experimental  conditions  in  order  to
verify the outcomes of the simulated PIV images.
The turbulent flow over a backward-facing step flow is
considered to be a valuable a test case since it contains several
features of interest, such as the sharp separation with a steep
velocity profile in the free mixing layer and a large spectrum of
scales developing downstream. Several investigations are still
devoted to this subject due to the complex flow behaviour (Le
et al 1997, Huang and Fiedler 1997, Scarano and Riethmuller
1999, 2000, among others).
The experiments are performed in a gravity-driven water
tunnel of 240(w)×120(h) mm2 cross section. The contraction
ratio  between  the  settling  chamber  and  the  test  section  is
6:1.  The channel step is placed 760 mm downstream of the
contraction.
The step expansion ratio is in the present case ER = 1.2.
The light source is a double cavity pulsed Nd:Yag laser.  Two
semi-cylindrical lenses and a spherical lens are used to shape
the laser beam into a 0.8 mm thick light sheet. Latex particles
(25 μm diameter) are used to seed the flow.
The image acquisition system is composed of a CCD video
sensor  PCO-SensiCam  with  1280 × 1024  pixel  resolution,
12 bits quantization. Measurements are performed in the plane
of symmetry over a region extending from the x/h = ?1 up
to 8.
Experiments  are  conducted  at  Reh   =  5.0 × 103,  and
the  free  stream  velocity  U0    =  0.125  m  s?1   (evaluated  at
x/h  =  ?1).   The  typical  time  separation  between  the  two
laser pulses of 5 ms is selected so as to obtain a maximum
in-plane displacement of about 0.5 mm (five pixels).
The  image  processing  is  performed  with  three  image
distortion  iterations.   The  interrogation  window  size  ranges
from 15 × 15 pixels to 31 × 31 pixels and an overlap factor of
75% is applied between adjacent windows.  The invalid data
yield (S/N < 1.5) is 2%. An example is shown in figure 22.
The same images are analysed with the WIDIM scheme
with a window size of 23×23 pixels and 75% window overlap,
with an invalid data yield of 3%.
The data are obtained over an unstructured grid and are
restored over a uniform Cartesian mesh by means of a two-
dimensional  quadratic  least-squares  regression.    From  the
representation of the velocity vector distribution over a regular
grid it is possible to compare the results obtained with the AR
method and those coming from the interrogation on a regular
mesh with uniform window size.
Figure  23  shows  the  improvement  obtained  with  the
adaptive resolution in terms of velocity gradient range.  From
the  vorticity  distribution  it  can  be  appreciated  that  the  two
methods  have  a  similar  performance  except  for  the  highly
sheared  and  vortical  regions  where  AR  returns  peak  values
about 20% higher. Finally, a direct comparison of the velocity
vector distribution is also shown in figure 24.   The velocity
vertical profiles are shown one-in-eight for clarity. It is possible
to identify those regions of the flow where the AR methods
brings a significant improvement: in the left side of the picture
the intense shear layer emanating from the step edge attains
values  of  the  strain  rate  as  high  as  0.5  pixel/pixel.   Further
R16
Iterative image deformation methods in PIV
Figure 23.  Instantaneous vorticity distribution (pixels/pixel). Uniform window size 23 × 23 pixels (left); adaptive window size
31 × 31 → 15 × 15 pixels (right).
600                                                  500                                                  400
X [pixels]
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
Y [pixels]
 
Figure 24.  Instantaneous velocity distribution (flow detail from figure 23). Uniform window size (black) and AR (red). A one-in-eight
velocity vertical profile is shown for clarity.
downstream  a  vortex  roll-up  exhibits  a  similar  value  of  the
vorticity.
It  is  worth  remarking  that  the  data  constitute  the  raw
output of the image evaluation and no spatial filtering or post-
processing is applied to the velocity vector data except for the
necessary interpolation from the unstructured to the Cartesian
mesh. A two-dimensional quadratic least-squares regression is
applied to evaluate the velocity at the structured grid locations.
8.  Conclusions
The  overview  of  PIV  interrogation  techniques  has  shown
that  the  cross-correlation  method  constitutes  the  basis  of  a
wide variety of algorithms in particle image motion analysis.
The  discussion  began  with  the  statement  that  the  digital
PIV  image  recording  technique  opened  the  development  of
interrogation algorithms of higher performances with respect
to  optical  methods.     The  general  features  of  the  digital
correlation algorithm were recalled and the main drawbacks
were discussed, such as the limit of the velocity and vorticity
dynamic  range  due  to  in-plane  loss  of  pairs.    The  typical
problems occurring during the cross-correlation analysis were
explained, showing the cross-correlation of a pair of single-
exposure digital PIV recordings.
The   problem   of   the   limited   velocity   range   was
handled  successfully  with  the  introduction  of  a  second-step
interrogation  with  the  offset  of  the  interrogation  area  or,
equivalently, performing the correlation search over a larger
extent  with  respect  to  the  interrogation  area.   The  resulting
method allows minimization of the dependence between the
velocity dynamic range and the spatial resolution.
Concerning    the    discrete    window    offset    technique
(described as the simplest two-step adaptive scheme) the CDI
method that shifts both windows equally with respect to the
centre  of  the  interrogation  location  yields  a  better  accuracy
without additional computational cost.
Among the most difficult forms of error to correct for is
the bias due to peak locking, which is inherent to the digital
imaging hardware.   This problem seems to be addressed by
the  introduction  of  schemes  that  apply  the  window  offset
with  a  sub-pixel  precision.   Techniques  that  apply  the  sub-
pixel window offset method (PID, WIDIM, PASTIS) showed
improvements in accuracy of about one order of magnitude.
Direct  computation  of  the  image  flow  velocity  and  its
derivatives  (CIV,  DMV)  was  demonstrated  to  be  a  viable
approach, although the performances on the determination of
the velocity gradient (vorticity) have not been fully assessed.
The  typical  answer  to  the  analysis  of  flows  with  a
high   deformation   rate   was   given   by   iterative   schemes.
The  displacement  spatial  distribution  obtained  with  cross-
correlation  analysis  is  used  to  predict  the  actual  particle
motion and to perform the image pattern deformation.   The
interrogation accuracy and robustness in the presence of highly
sheared  flows  is  significantly  improved  with  respect  to  the
basic scheme. However, in general such advanced algorithms
increase  the  computational  cost  because  of  their  iterative
structure, and most of all because of the additional image re-
sampling process.
Spatial  resolution  was  discussed  in  terms  of  spatial  re-
sponse of the correlation method to sinusoidal displacement
distribution.   It was proven that both the basic and iterative
cross-correlation methods have a response that is similar to
that of a top-hat filter having the same dimensions as the inter-
rogation window. It was concluded that the major limitation on
improving the spatial resolution consists in the seeding particle
spatial density and the resolution of the recording devices.
R17
F Scarano
A possible step towards adaptive resolution was proposed
with  a  flow-adaptive  local  window  refinement  scheme  that
shrinks  the  interrogation  window  according  to  the  local
curvature of the velocity components.  As a result, the spatial
response of the AR method returned a significant improvement
showing a lower modulation effect.
The performance assessment of the AR-WIDIM method
was   completed   with   an   experimental   verification   made
with   PIV   images   of   a   turbulent   flow   over   a   BFS.   In
the  comparative  analysis  the  method  showed  an  improved
robustness and accuracy, especially with respect to the highly
sheared flow region.   As an overall impression,  the window
deformation method returned a lower noise level and small-
scale fluctuations were measured with a higher precision.
In   conclusion,   several   efforts   were   reported   in   the
development of methods based on iterative cross-correlation
and image deformation over the last decade.  It is the author’s
opinion that the PIV technique has already reached its maturity
concerning the image processing methods,  therefore further
studies  in  this  direction  might  not  repeat  the  improvements
obtained  so  far.     However,   it  is  expected  that  marginal
developments could bring further improvements with respect
to the interrogation robustness (data validation) and the spatial
resolution with AR or hybrid methods.
References
Adrian R J 1988 Statistical properties of particle image velocimetry
measurements in turbulent flow Laser Anemometry in Fluid
Mechanics?III (Lisbon: Instituto Superior Tecnico) pp 115?19
Adrian R J 1991 Particle-imaging techniques for experimental fluid
mechanics Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 23 261?304
Boillot A and Prasad A K 1996 Optimization procedure for pulse
separation in cross-correlation PIV Exp. Fluids 21 87
Cho Y-C 1989 Digital image velocimetry Appl. Opt. 28 740?8
Cowen E A and Monismith S G 1996 A hybrid digital particle
tracking velocimetry technique Exp. Fluids 22 199?201
Fincham A M and Delerce G 2000 Advanced optimization of
correlation imaging velocimetry algorithms Exp. Fluids 29
S013?22
Fincham A M and Spedding G R 1997 Low cost, high resolution
DPIV for measurement of turbulent fluid flow Exp. Fluids 23
449?62
Guezennec Y G and Kiritsis N 1990 Statistical investigation of
errors in particle image velocimetry Exp. Fluids 10 138?46
Gui L, Longo J and Stern F 2001 Biases of PIV measurement of
turbulent flow and the masked correlation-based interrogation
algorithm Exp. Fluids 30 27?35
Gui L and Merzkirch W 2000 A comparative study of the MQD
method and several correlation-based PIV evaluation
algorithms Exp. Fluids 28 36?44
Gui L, Merzkirch W and Fei R 2000 A digital mask technique for
reducing the bias error of the correlation-based PIV
interrogation algorithm Exp. Fluids 29 30?5
Hall E L 1979 Computer Image Processing and Recognition (New
York: Academic)
Hart D P 1998 The elimination of correlation errors in PIV
processing 9th Int. Symp. on Applications of Laser Techniques
to Fluid Mechanics (Lisbon, Portugal, July 1998)
Hart D P 2000 DPIV error correction Exp. Fluids 29 13?22
Hesselink L 1988 Digital image processing in flow visualization
Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech. 20 421?85
Horn B K P and Schunck B G 1981 Determining optical flow Artif.
Intell. 17 185?203
Huang H, Dabiri D and Gharib M 1997 On errors of digital particle
image velocimetry Meas. Sci. Technol. 8 1427?40
Huang H T and Fiedler H E 1997 A DPIV study of a starting flow
downstream of a backward-facing step Exp. Fluids 23 395?404
Huang H T, Fielder H F and Wang J J 1993a Limitation and
improvement of PIV, part I. Limitation of conventional
techniques due to deformation of particle image patterns Exp.
Fluids 15 168?74
Huang H T, Fielder H F and Wang J J 1993b Limitation and
improvement of PIV, part II. Particle image distortion, a novel
technique Exp. Fluids 15 263?73
Ishikawa M, Murai Y, Wada A, Iguchi M, Okamoto K and
Yamamoto F 2000 A novel algorithm for particle tracking
velocimetry using the velocity gradient tensor Exp. Fluids 29
519?31
Jambunathan K, Ju X Y, Dobbins B N and Ashforth-Frost S 1995
An improved cross correlation technique for particle image
velocimetry Meas. Sci. Technol. 6 507?14
Keane R D and Adrian R J 1990 Optimization of particle image
velocimeters. Part 1: double pulsed system Meas. Sci. Technol.
1 1202?15
Keane R D and Adrian R J 1992 Theory of cross correlation analysis
of PIV images J. Appl. Sci. Res. 49 191?215
Keane R D, Adrian R J and Zhang Y 1995 Super-resolution particle
imaging velocimetry Meas. Sci. Technol. 6 754?68
Kimura I and Takamori T 1986 Image processing of flow around a
circular cylinder by using correlation technique Flow
Visualization IV ed C Veret pp 2334?6
Kumar S and Banerjee S 1998 Development and application of a
hierarchical system for digital particle image velocimetry to
free-surface turbulence Phys. Fluids 10 160?77
Le H, Moin P and Kim J 1997 Direct numerical simulation of
turbulent flow over a backward facing step J. Fluid Mech. 330
349?74
Lecordier B 1997 Etude de l’interaction de la propagation d’une
flamme premelang
´
ee avec le champ aerodynamique, par
association de la tomographie Laser et de la V
´
elocim
´
etrie par
Images de particules Th`
ese de doctorat de l’Universite´ de
Rouen
Lin J H and Perlin M 1998 Improved methods for thin, surface
boundary layer investigations Exp. Fluids 25 431?44
Louren，
co L 1996 Particle image velocimetry Particle Image
Velocimetry (Von K´
arm´
an Institute Lecture Series 1996-03)
(Belgium: Rhode-Saint Gen
´
ese)
Louren，
co L 1999 Particle image and tracking velocimetry Optical
Diagnostics of Particles and Droplets (Von K´
arm´
an Institute
Lecture Series 1999-01) (Belgium: Rhode-Saint Gen
´
ese)
Louren，
co L and Krothapalli A 1995 On the accuracy of velocity and
vorticity measurements with PIV Exp. Fluids 18 421?8
Louren，
co L and Krothapalli A 1998 Mesh-free second order
accurate algorithm for PIV processing Proc. Int. Conf. on
Optical Technology and Image Processing in Fluid, Thermal
and Combustion Flows (Yokohama, Japan, Dec. 1998) p 224
Niblack W 1986 An Introduction to Digital Image Processing
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall)
Nogueira J, Lecuona A and Rodriguez P A 1999 Local field
correction PIV: on the increase of accuracy of digital PIV
systems Exp. Fluids 27 107?16
Nogueira J, Lecuona A and Rodriguez P A 2001 Identification of a
new source of peak locking, analysis and its removal in
conventional and super-resolution PIV techniques Exp. Fluids
30 309?16
Plas van der G A J and Bastiaans R J M 1998 Accuracy and
resolution of a fast PTV-algorithm suitable for HIRES-PIV
Proc. 8th Int. Symp. Flow Vis. (Sorrento, Italy)
Prasad A K, Adrian R J, Landreth C C and Offutt P W 1992 Effect
of resolution on the speed and accuracy of particle image
velocimetry interrogation Exp. Fluids 13 105?16
Pratt W K 1978 Digital Image Processing (New York: Wiley)
Quenot G M 1992 The orthogonal algorithm for optical flow
detection using dynamic programming Proc. IEEE ICASSP 3
249?52
Quenot G M, Pakleza J and Kowalewsky T A 1998 Particle image
velocimetry with optical flow Exp. Fluids 25 177?89
R18
Iterative image deformation methods in PIV
Raffel M, Willert C E and Kompenhans J 1998 Particle Image
Velocimetry, a Practical Guide (Berlin: Springer)
Riethmuller M L (ed) 2000 Particle Image Velocimetry and
Associated Techniques, VKI LS 2000-01 (Rhode-Saint Genese,
BE: Von Karman Institute)
Rohaly J, Nakajiama T and Ikeda Y 2000 Identification of true
particle image displacement based on false correlation
symmetry at poor signal peak detectability Exp. Fluids 29
S023?33
Ruan X, Song X and Yamamoto F 2001 Direct measurement of the
vorticity field in digital particle images Exp. Fluids 30
696?704
Scarano F, Benocci C and Riethmuller M L 1999 Pattern recognition
analysis of the turbulent flow past a backward facing step Phys.
Fluids 11 3808?18
Scarano F and Riethmuller M L 1998 Perfectionnement dans les
techniques de traitement des donn
´
ees en v
´
elocim
´
etrie par
images de particules Actes 6`
eme Congr`
es Francophone de
V´
elocim´
etrie, Laser (Saint-Louis, France)
Scarano F and Riethmuller M L 1999 Iterative multigrid approach in
PIV image processing Exp. Fluids 26 513?23
Scarano F and Riethmuller M L 2000a Advances in iterative
multigrid PIV image processing Exp. Fluids 29 S051?60
Scarano F and Riethmuller M L 2000b Temporal analysis of
coherent structures in a turbulent BFS flow with PIV 10th Int.
Symp. on Applications of Laser Techniques to Fluid Mechanics
(Lisbon, Portugal)
Sugii Y, Nishio S, Okuno T and Okamoto K 2000 A highly accurate
iterative PIV technique using a gradient method Meas. Sci.
Technol. 11 1666?73
Takehara K, Adrian R J, Etoh G T and Christensen K T 2000 A
Kalman tracker for super-resolution PIV Exp. Fluids 29
S034?41
Tokumaru P T and Dimotakis P E 1995 Image correlation
velocimetry Exp. Fluids 19 1?15
Utami T and Ueno T 1984 Visualization and picture processing of
turbulent flow Exp. Fluids 2 25?32
Utami T and Ueno T 1991 A cross-correlation technique for
velocity field extraction from particulate visualization Exp.
Fluids 10 213?23
Wernet M P 2001 New insights into particle image velocimetry data
using fuzzy-logic-based correlation/particle tracking
processing Exp. Fluids 30 434?47
Wereley and Meinhart 2000 Accuracy improvements in particle
image velocimetry algorithms. PIV 10th Int. Symp. on
Applications of Laser Techniques to Fluid Mechanics, (Lisbon,
Portugal)
Westerweel J 1993 Digital particle image velocimetry PhD
Dissertation Delft University Press, Delft
Westerweel J 1994 Effcient detection of spurious vectors in particle
image velocimetry data Exp. Fluids 16 236?47
Westerweel J 1997 Fundamentals of digital particle image
velocimetry Meas. Sci. Technol. 8 1379?92
Westerweel J 2000 Theoretical analysis of the measurement
precision in particle image velocimetry Exp. Fluids 29 S3?12
Westerweel J, Dabiri D and Gharib M 1997 The effect of a discrete
window offset on the accuracy of cross-correlation analysis of
digital PIV recordings Exp. Fluids 23 20?8
Willert C E and Gharib M 1991 Digital particle image velocimetry
Exp. Fluids 10 181?93
R19
