See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/230937342
An improved cross correlation technique for particle image velocimetry
Article??in??Measurement Science and Technology ・ January 1999
DOI: 10.1088/0957-0233/6/5/012
CITATIONS
125
READS
301
4 authors, including:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
4D Assessment of the Dynamic Asymmetry of Facial Expressions in Surgically Managed Unilateral Cleft Lip and Palate patients View project
Sur-face View project
Xiangyang Ju
NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde
94 PUBLICATIONS???1,286 CITATIONS???
SEE PROFILE
Shirley Ashforth-Frost
University of Nottingham
27 PUBLICATIONS???818 CITATIONS???
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Xiangyang Ju on 22 May 2014.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
Meas. Sci. Techno\. 6 (1995) 507-514. Printed in the UK 
1              tAn improved cross correlation 
echnique for particle image velocimetry    I 
K Jambunathan, X Y Ju, B N Dobbins and S Ashforth-Frost 
Department of  Mechanical Engineering, The Nottingham Trent University, 
Nottingham NG1  4BU, UK 
Received 6 December 1994, accepted for publication 6 February 1995 
Abstract.  The standard cross correlation technique frequently used in  particle 
image velocimetry to extract velocity vectors necessitates the assumption that 
the velocity gradients inside the interrogation area are negligible.  However, the 
procedure is generally video-based, so such an assumption may  no  longer be 
valid.  This is particularly so in  re-circulation zones, in  which the distortion between 
images can be dramatic. A  new iterative procedure for re-building the second 
image, based on velocity gradients of  particles due to displacement, rotation and 
shear, has been proposed. This improved cross correlation algorithm has been 
shown to be considerably more accurate for simulated uniform, re-circulating and 
bi-axial shearing flows, and has been applied to the case of  natural convection due 
to a heated horizontal cylinder. 
1.  Introduction 
Particle   image  velocimetry   (PIV)    is   a   non-intrusive 
measurement technique, which can be  used to measure 
full  field  velocity data within  a two-dimensional plane 
of  a particle-seeded flow  field.  That the technique has 
developed rapidly over the last two decades is indicated 
by   the   large  amount  of   published  work,  which  has 
been  reviewed  by  Adrian  (1986,  1991) and  Kabayashi 
(1988).    Generally,  all  PIV   methods  can  be  divided 
into  two  steps:    fustly,   recording  the   images  of   a 
particle  seeded Bow;  and  secondly, extracting velocity 
vectors from  the recorded images.  The  PIV  techniques 
are  often categorized according to the recording media 
used   (Willert   and   Gharib   1991).     In   photographic 
PIV   doubldmulti-exposure  images  of  a  flow  field  are 
recorded on  film  and  then  various  techniques are used 
to extract the velocity data.  Backer and Fourney (1977) 
used  Young’s  fringes methods, Adrian  (1989) used  the 
auto-correlation method  and Cenedese and  Paglialunga 
(1990) used the  tracking method.   In  video PIV  single- 
exposure images of a flow are recorded onto video tape 
or  directly  into  computer memory.   Extraction of  full- 
field  velocity  data  can  then  be  achieved  by   analysis 
of  sequential images  using  either  the  cross correlation 
method (Utami and  Blackwelder  1991) or  the  tracking 
method (Hassan and  Canaan 1991). 
The tracking technique measures the  velocity based 
on  particle pairs  but  difficulties arise when  the  spatial 
density  of   particles  is  high.     Young’s  fringes,  auto- 
correlation and cross correlation methods are frequently 
applied.   All  of  these  techniques assume  that  velocity 
gradients  are  negligible  in   the  interrogation  area  in 
0957-0233/95/050507+08$19.500 1995 IOP  Publishing Ltd 
the  determination  of  the  mean  velocity.    Usually  the 
interrogation area of  photographic PIV  is small (around 
1 mm2) and the assumption is thus sustained. However, 
for the video cross correlation method, the interrogation 
area is not  small enough to be  negligible and  the non- 
uniformity in the velocity distribution cannot be ignored. 
Reconstruction of  the interrogation area by  considering 
the  velocity  gradient  has  been  suggested by  Ashforth- 
Frost et al  (1993) and Huang et al  (1993a,  1993b).  In 
this  paper,  a  new  method is  proposed  by  which to  re- 
build  the  second image instead  of  building each single 
interrogation  area,  paying  particular  attention  to  the 
extraction of  velocity vectors taking  into  consideration 
the effects of three flow movement components, namely 
spatial uniform transfer, rotation and bi-axial shearing. 
2.  The conventional cross correlation method 
and its drawbacks 
2.1.  The conventional cross correlation technique 
After having acquired two sequential images of the flow, 
we  employed  cross  correlation to  extract  the  velocity 
vectors from the images via an N  x N  pixel interrogation 
window, which is shown schematically in figure 1. The 
area of interest in the first frame is A  and outside of  this 
window is labelled Ao.  Their counterparts in the second 
frame  are  E   and  Eo  respectively.    An  interrogation 
window  f(i, j )  centred  at  a  particular  position  ( x ,  y )  
is sampled within A .  Its counterpart is g(i, j ) within E .  
The cross  correlation coefficient  R&,       I  )    is calculated 
507 
K Jambunathan et a/ 
2.2.  The effects of flow movement 
Considering f (i, j ) t o be the input image and g ( i ,j  )  
the 
output  image,  the  relation  between  f (i, j )  and  g ( i ,  j )  
will be 
g ( i ,  j ) % f ( i ,  j )* s ( i ,  j )                  (3) 
* denotes  the convolution  of  the  two functions  f (i, j )  
and  s(i, j )  neglecting  noise  and  s(i, j )  is  an  image 
transfer  function.   The  cross  correlation  of  f (i, j )  and 
g ( i ,  j )  
can he written as 
a  y  8    - J  (6,  J I  y ai;.   j ;  - J"G, j ) 0 f (i, j ) *s(i, j )  
-     ~                ,.   .. 
Figure 1. Images A and 8. 
= R,f    *s(i,j ) .                                                 (4) 
The location  of  the  individual  particles  is  a  stationary 
random  process  such  that  the  input  function   f ( i ,  j )  
 )",u("-                                                                  correlates 
with  the  image 
with itself 
transfer 
only 
function 
at the origin. 
movesThthee 
convolution 
l"""""                              correlation 
peak away from the origin. 
Considering   a   flow   element   of   a   general   two- 
dimensional  flow,  Helmholtz  velocity  theory  divides  a 
movement of  a flow element into three subsidiary terms 
Figure 2.  The FFT  procedure.                                                        (Wu  1982): 
between  the  pattems  f ( i , j  )  and  g(i; j )  (Kimura  and 
Takamori  1986) using                                                                                           V  = V O +  i A V 6 r  +Vq5                       ( 5 )  
where  V   represents  the  velocity  in  the  fluid  element 
and  V,  represents  the velocity  of  the spatial  transfer  of 
the  fluid  element.   The  three  terms  on  the  right-hand 
side of equation ( 5 )  are translation, rotation and element 
bi-axial  shear  respectively.   Westerweel  (1993) pointed 
out  that,  if  the  interrogation  window  is  considered  as 
a  flow  element,   then  the  rigid   shift  results   in   only 
parts  of  the  f ( i ,j  )  and  g ( i ,  j )  contributing  to  R,,~, 
The   pe*     is  shifted   away   from   the   origin     and   the 
rotation  and  deformation  terms  lead  to  broadening  of 
f o g  e) FG*                             (2)         the   peak   (Willert  and   Gharib   1991).     Huang   et  al 
(1993a)  analysed  the  limitations  of   conventional  PIV 
due to velocity gradients  and out-of-pattem motion.  An 
artificial  distortion  method  was  proposed  by  Ashforth- 
Frost  er  ul  (1993)  and  Huang  et al  (1993b).  but  only 
the  linear  velocity  gradients  were  considered,   For  the 
wr cross correlation method, all of  the flow parts affect 
the  coefficients  of  correlation  and  influence  the  peak 
position, 
1 
R f 8 ( k ,1 )  = (i=:aj=:mc c f (i. j ) g ( i  - k,j   - 1)  
x ( 2 2f z(i, j ) 2 2g 2(i-k ,  j - l )        . 
(1) 
According to the convolution  theory, the correlation 
operation in the space domain becomes multiplication in 
the frequency domain  (Gonzalez and  Wintz  1987): 
i=--m   j = - m                         i=-m  j=-m                            r2 
where  o  denotes  correlation,  F   and  G  are  the  Fourier 
transforms  of  f  and  g  and  G'    is  the  conjugate  of  G .  
A  fast Fourier  transform (m)i s employed  to simplify 
and significantly speed-up the cross correlation Process. 
The procedure is shown  schematicab in  figure 2.  The 
FlT requires  that the  number  Of   rows  and  co1umns  Of 
the  input  and  output  must  have  an  exponent  of  2; the 
size  of  the  interrogation  window  must  therefore  have 
corresponding   dimensions.     A  high  cross  correlation 
value near unity is observed when many particle images 
in  the  first  image  match  their  corresponding  spatially 
shifted  partners   in   the   second  image.     Small  cross 
correlation   peaks   may   be  observed   when  individual 
particle  images  match  with  other  particle  images.  The 
highest  correlation  peak  is  considered  to  represent  the 
best  match  of  pa,.ticle  images  between   the  windows 
f ( i ,  j )  and   g ( i ,  j ) .      The   offsets     (  A  ~A,  ~  o)f   the 
peak,  which  are measured  from the  origin  of the  cross 
correlation coefficient map, represent the average spatial 
shift of  particles  from image  A  to image  B  at  position 
( x .  Y). 
508 
3.  The improved cross corre'ation Inethod 
A  method  is  now  proposed  that  reconstructs  a  sxond 
image by  considering the effects of  the three terms in  a 
two-dimensional  flow.  This  second  image  was  used  to 
correct the velocity obtained from the conventional cross 
correlation  method.    The  technique  of  reconstruction 
of  the  second  image  and  the  whole  procedure  of  the 
improved   method   will   he   introduced.      Three   peak 
location methods were investigated. 
3.1.  Reconstruction of the second image 
If  whole field displacement vectors (Ax, Ay)  are known 
between   images   A   and   B ,    and   the   flow   is   two- 
dimensional, then  the  second image pattern can be  re- 
built  to  be  similar to  the  first  image.   The  whole  field 
displacement vectors are constituted by 
X B   = X A  + Ax                              (6) 
YE   = Y A  + AY                               (7) 
where ( X A ,  YA) 
is the position of  a particle in image A  at 
time T  and  ( X B ,  YE)i s the position of the same particle 
in image B  at time T + f. A  digitized particle image is 
represented by the pixel’s grey distribution. This means 
that  the  grey  I (xa, YB,  T  + t)  in  image  B  is  equal  to 
( ( x A ,  y   ~T,)   
in image A. 
A new image B‘   can be reconstructed from image B. 
The grey I ( x B ~Y,E ,,  T )i n B’   is the grey I ( x B ,YE, T t t )  
in B ,  where ( X E S ,YE,) 
is identical to ( X A ,  yA). By noting 
that  X A   and  YA   must be  integers and  the displacements 
( A x ,Ay) are usually non-integers, the pixel intensity of 
position ( X B ,  YE) 
is obtained using bilinear interpolation: 
where 
i B   = integer(xB) 
j  B   = integer(yB) 
E;  = X B  - is  
E,   = YB  - jB  
Io  = I ( i s ,j  B )  
[z   = I ( ~ +B 1, j B )  
11 = I ( i B ,  jB + 1) 
13  = I ( ~ +B 1,  j B + 1) 
NO = (1 - ti)(l - E , )  
N2  = ~   ~- (~   1j  )    
N I  = (1 - E  ~  )  E  ~   
N3 = E { E ~ .  
I(XB,YE)i s  set  at   position  (xB,, y   ~  in)   B‘.     After 
the   pixels’   grey   levels   have   been   calculated,   B‘ 
is   constructed.      The   image   B‘     is   sampled   by    a 
window   g’(x, y)  centred  at  position  (x,y ).     If   the 
displacement data are accurate and  the particle  flow  is 
two-dimensional, then,  neglecting electronic noise  and 
the averaging effect of  bilinear interpolation, the highest 
cross correlation coefficient o f f  (x, y)  and g‘(x, y) will 
be unity. 
The whole field displacement is currently unknown. 
The  displacement  data  (Ax, Ay)   at  each  point  can 
be  calculated  using  the  conventional  cross correlation 
method. Supposing that the actual displacement is (Ax+ 
Sx, Ay + 6y), where  (an,6 y)  is  a measure of the non- 
uniformity of  the displacement around the point, then if 
the second image B‘   were built based on  (Ax, Ay) and 
the  window  g’(x. y )  were  sampled,  the  peak  position 
of  the  cross  correlation  between  f ( x ,  y)  and  g‘(x, y) 
would be offset from the origin by  (6’x,S ’y).  (6’x, S’y) 
is  an  average  over  the  interrogation  N   x   N  window 
and is normally  small compared with  (Ax, Ay)  so that 
the  effects  of   non-uniformity  are  reduced.     A   new 
displacement vector (AxfS’x,  Ayt6‘y) is found, which 
is more accurate. 
An  improved cross correlation technique 
3.2.  The procedure 
Before the new procedure is introduced, the assumption 
is made that,  the  higher  the  correlation coefficient, the 
higher will be the accuracy of  the  velocity data. 
Since  the  initial  velocity  data  are  unknown,  it  is 
necessary to  use  an  iterative procedure, which includes 
six major steps. 
(i)  Use  the  conventional  cross  correlation velocity 
method to extract initial full field displacement vectors. 
Eliminate error vectors using a filtering subroutine such 
as that  proposed by  Kimura ef  al  (1988). 
(ii)  Bilinear  interpolation  of   the  displacement  at 
every pixel  inside the first image  A  using the extracted 
velocity.  Find  the grey level of every pixel of  the new 
second image  E‘,  which the  procedure in  the  previous 
section introduced. 
(iii) Copy A0  as the outside image of  B’  for velocity 
extraction at  the  points  around  its  boundary,  in  case 
parts  of  f ( x ,  y)  and  g ‘ ( x ,y )  have been  sampled from 
the outside images A  and B. 
(iv) Set a correction count  to  record  the correction 
time and set it to zero. 
(v)  Calculate the  cross  correlation of  f ( x , y )  and 
g’(x, y).  Find  the peak position of  the coefficient map. 
If   the  highest  coefficient  is  larger  than  the  recorded 
coefficient  of position   (x,y).  add  the  offset  to   the 
recorded  displacement at  position  ( x ,  y)  and  add  1 to 
the correction count.  Otherwise, omit this position and 
continue at  the next position. 
(vi) Continue until all full field velocity vectors have 
been  corrected  and  check  the  correction  number,  if  it 
is not  zero,  return to step 3;  if  it  is zero exit from the 
procedure. 
4.  Validation of the improved method 
Synthetic  flow  images  were  generated  for  simulating 
uniform,  re-circulating  and  bi-axial  shearing flows  for 
validation  of  the  improved  cross  correlation  method. 
The  first  record  image  was   obtained  using  a  black 
board with randomly distributed white dots. The second 
image  was  generated  by   translating,  rotating  or  bi- 
axially  shearing  the  first  image  to  simulate  uniform, 
re-circulating  and  bi-axial  shearing  fluid  flows  using 
imaging  techniques.     Typical  images   are  shown  in 
figures  3(a)-(d).    The  second  image  of  the  synthetic 
uniform flow was generated by shifting the first image in 
the X direction by  a known distance. Distances of 2, 4, 
6, 8 and  10 pixels were applied and the resulting second 
images  were  saved  separately  for  velocity  extraction. 
The second images of simulated re-circulating flow were 
obtained by  rotating the first image by  angles of 0.035, 
0.07, 0.105  and  0.14 rad  around  the  centre of  the  first 
image. Shearing flow was simulated by  shearing the first 
image with shear strains of 0.05, 0.1,  0.15, 0.2.0.25   and 
0.3.  After the images were generated, the conventional 
method  and   the   improved  method   were   applied   to 
509 
K Jambunathan  et al 
Figure 3.  ( a )  
The original image   ( b )  1 he translated image.  (c) I  ne rotated image   ( a )  I   ne snearea  image. 
extract the  velocity  data, which  were compared with  the          improved method and broken  lines represent those of the 
expected  data.                                                                                conventional  method.    A  maximum  difference  of  0.05 
In  step  (v)  of  section  3.2,  procedures  for  locating          pixels  occurs for the case of  shift (figure 4(a)) indicated 
the   peak   position   were   presented.      The   maximum          by  different broken lines.  However,  the parabolic  fit has 
of  the   R f x ( i ,j )  yields  only  a  rough   estimate  of  the          been selected due to its superior accuracy and simplicity. 
displacement   (with  a  resolution  of  one  pixel).     Suh-                That  the  average  absolute  errors  of  the  improved 
pixel  results  for  the  peak  position  can  be  obtained  by          method are lower than those of the conventional  method 
three different  methods.  Willert and Gharib (1991) used          is   illustrated   in   figure   4(a)-(c).       For   translational 
a  three-point   curve  fit  to  find  the  sub-pixel   position.          movements,  relative  errors  were  decreased  from  about 
Prasad   et  a/  (1992)  demonstrated   that  parabolic  and          5% with the conventional  method  to ahout  1% with  the 
Gaussian  curve  fits yielded  RMS  errors  that were  about          improved  one for pure  shift  measurements.   In  the case 
half  those  from  the  centre  of  mass  technique  (Willert          of  rotation,  relative  errors  decreased  from  about  7% to 
and  Gharib  1991). They  also argued that this  trend  was          about  3%.   The  results  of  shearing  showed  that  relative 
true only for flows whose velocity  gradient is negligible          errors  decreased from about  10% to about 5%. 
and,   consequently,   they   selected  the  centre  of   mass                Specifically,    for   the   results   of   the   translational 
method.     In  this  paper,   the  centre  of   mass   method,          movements,  if  shift  distances  in  the x   and  y  directions 
parabolic and Gaussian curve fits are compared.  Figure 4        are larger than ten pixels, then the errors in  the computed 
shows  that  there  is  little  difference  in  the  accuracy  of          vectors   increase  rapidly.     Willert  and  Gharib  (1991) 
the  three methods;  full  lines  represent  the results of  the          argued  that  the  maximum  measurable  displacement  is 
510 
An  improved  cross correlation technique 
g 
(a) 
-- center  of  mass 
o’60  1 ;F  17 garabola 
aussian                           f 
li 
0.00 
(b) 
*  -- center  Of   mass 
030  1  2       garabola 
aussian 
*  -- center  of   mass                        (4 
x  ----  gaaurassbipolna.  
Image  shear  strain 
2 0.50 
P 
0.40 
0.0   0.0    0.0   0 . 0       0 . 0       1  .  0          1 . 0  
Normalized  values  of shift. 
rotation   and sheatin# 
Figure 4.   (a) Shift, (b) rotation, (c)shear and ( d )a 
comparison of the mean correlation coefficients. Broken 
lines are results from the conventional method and full 
lines are results from the improved method. 
T                                                I 
 e, RECORDER                       pMONITOR, 
IMAGE 
IBM  3B86OSAXR D 
Figure 5.  (a) A schematic diagram of the experimental 
rig.  (b)A schematic diagram of the image acquisition 
arrangement. 
a third of  the interrogation  window size. 
Figure 4(d) shows a  comparison  of  the mean  value 
of the maximum correlation  coefficients  of  points inside 
the   area  of   interest  obtained   from   the  conventional 
method  and  the  improved  method  using  the  parabolic 
curve  fitting procedure.   The horizontal  axis represents 
normalized  values of  shift distances,  angles of  rotation 
and  shear  strains,  which  have  been  normalized   with 
respect  to  ten  pixels,  0.14  rad  and  0.30  respectively. 
The  broken  and  full  lines  represent  the  results  of the 
conventional  and  improved  methods  respectively.   The 
mean  coefficients  of   the   results   of   the  conventional 
method  decrease  as  the   values  of  the  shift,   rotation 
and  shear  strain  increase.    The  mean  coefficients  of 
the results  of  the  improved  method  have  higher  values 
and are less  sensitive  to  shift, rotation  and  shear strain. 
Comparison  of  figures 4(a)-(c) with  figure 4(d) shows 
that  higher accuracy is obtained  with  a high correlation 
coefficient since the displacement errors are smaller for 
higher coefficients. 
5.  Experimental results 
To  assess  the  performance  of  the  proposed  technique, 
it  was  applied  to  the  analysis  of  recorded  images  of 
natural  convection  from  a  heated  horizontal  cylinder. 
The experimental  arrangement is shown  in  figure  5(a). 
The  test  cell  consisted  of  a  transparent  perspex  tank 
(150  mm  x  186  mm x  IO0  mm)  containing  water  at 
25°C.  A  thin  seamless  stainless  steel  tube  (diameter 
51 1 
K Jambunathan el a/ 
Time interuaL : 0.5 second         10x10  pixels-- 
Figure 6. (a)Velocity data extracted by the conventional cross Correlation method. 
(b)Distribution of  correlation coefficient of the conventional correlation method. 
13 mm) represented  the heated cylinder.  Warm  water at 
about 50°C from a constant-temperature  water bath was 
circulated  through  the  tube.   The  flow  was  artificially 
seeded  with  0.01%  micro-encapsulated   Liquid  crystal 
particles  of  100 pm mean  diameter.   A  thin  plane  of 
the flow  domain was  illuminated using  white light and 
images were recorded at right angles to this plane using 
a  Pulnix  TLC-X  CCD camera.    The  reason  for  using 
liquid crystals as the seeding particles  is that the current 
work  is  aimed  at  developing  a  comprehensive  system 
for measuring  velocity and temperature  simultaneously. 
This is also the justification  for using  white light rather 
than  laser  Light  as the source of  illurnhation. 
A  Data  Translation  DT2871  image  board  installed 
in  an  IBM  PC/SX   was  used  to  acquire  a  sequence 
of  512  x  512  pixels   x8  bit  resolution  frames,  either 
directly   from   the   CCD   camera  or  from  a   Sony  U- 
Matic  VO-58OOPS  video  recorder.    A  high-resolution 
image  monitor  was  used  to  view  the  particle  images 
and  select an  area of  interest  before  collecting  the  raw 
data  for  analysis.   Frames  can  be  analysed  at  intervals 
512 
of  40  ms,  determined  by  the  video rate  (25 frames per 
second). The image acquisition arrangements are shown 
in  figure 5(b). 
Figures  6(a) and  7(a) show  the  flow  patterns  in  a 
region 2-8  diameters above the cylindrical tube.  Prior to 
the cylindrical tube being heated, no convective  motion 
was evident  within  the test  section.  On  supplying  heat 
to the cylinder, the upward convected heat  transfer was 
immediately  apparent  in  a  central  core  directly  above 
the  cylinder,  shown  in  figures  6(a) and  7(a).  As  the 
flow reached the free surface of the water, two counter- 
rotating re-circulation regions  were formed, but the flow 
was  not  entirely  symmetric.    The  initially  isothermal 
and  stationary  flow  developed  into  a  stratified  thermal 
field.   Having  allowed  a  velocity  field  to  develop,  two 
sequential  images  were  acquired  with  a  0.5 s  interval. 
Figure 6(a) shows the resulting  velocity field, extracted 
using  the  conventional  cross  correlation  method.   The 
calculated   correlation  coefficients   were  in   the   range 
0.054.95,  and  are  shown  in  figure  6(b) with  contour 
increments of  0.05.  The  lowest  values occurred  in  the 
An improved cross correlation technique 
Vector pattern: 
Time interual : 0.5 second                 10x10  pixels--    0 
I,                                                                                                                                                     II I 
Figure 7. (a)V elocity data extracted by the improved cross correlation method, 
(b)Distribution of  correlation coefficients of  the improved method. 
shear  layer  and  re-circulation  regions.   The  maximum 
velocities  recorded   were  of   the  order  of  0.1  m  s-'. 
The  proposed  improved  method  was  used  to  correct 
this  velocity  data  and  42  iterations  were  necessary  to 
achieve convergence.  The results, plotted in figure 7(a), 
show  a  marked  improvement  when  compared  to  the 
recorded images.  Corresponding correlation coefficients 
plotted  in  figure 7(6) show a significant increase in  the 
shear layer and re-circulation regions: from 0.05 to 0.65. 
The highest correlation coefficients were also marginally 
improved; from 0.95 to 0.98. 
For  this   particular   example,   using   the  improved 
technique,  the overall CPU  time increased  from  14 min 
for 3696 vectors to 2 h, which is acceptable considering 
the improvement  in accuracy.  However, for economy, it 
is not always necessary to execute the iterative correction 
procedure  when  high  correlation  coefficients prevail  in 
the previous iteration. 
Finally,   it   is   worth   noting   that   the   results   of 
the  improved   technique  are  dependent  on  the  initial 
results obtained using the conventional cross correlation 
method.  In the extreme case, if the conventional method 
yields   very   poor  results,   then  use   of   the  improved 
technique may be ineffective. 
6.  Conclusion 
An   improved   cross   correlation   technique   has   been 
proposed   to   overcome   errors    in    the    analysis   of 
video   images   for   PIV    due   to   appreciable   velocity 
gradients.     The  technique   has  been   investigated   for 
natural  convection  from  a  heated  horizontal  cylinder. 
Improvements in accuracy have been observed, indicated 
by    the   increase   in    correlation    coefficients.        For 
translational  movements, relative  errors  were decreased 
from  about 5% with  the conventional  method  to  about 
1% with the improved one for pure shift measurements. 
In  the 'case  of  rotation,  relative  errors  decreased  from 
about 7% to about 3%.  The results of  shearing showed 
that relative errors  decreased from  about  10% to about 
5%.  This  ;,is  been  facilitated  by  subjecting  images  to 
513 
K Jambunathan ef a/ 
various  magnitudes of  displacement, rotation  and  shear 
strain. The most significant improvements were obtained 
in  the shear layer and  re-circulation  regions of  the flow 
field in which t h e  highest velocity gradients prevail.  T h e  
increase  in  CPU  time  using  the  proposed  technique  is 
considered acceptable in return  for the improvement  in 
accuracy. 
Acknowledgment 
Thanks are due to T h e  Nottingham Trent University  and 
t h e  UK Higher Education Funding Council (HEFC) for 
t h e  financial support provided. 
References 
Adrian  R J   1986 Multi-point optical  measurements  of 
simultaneous vectors in unsteady flow-a     review  Int. J. 
Heat  Fluid  Flow  7  1 2 7 4 5  
velocimeters ICALEO  '89 Optical Methods in  Flow  and 
Particle Diagnostics pp 56-71 
- 
1991 Particle-imaging techniques for experimental  fluid 
mechanics Ann. Rev. Flaid  Mech. W 261-304 
Ashforth-Frost  S,  Dobbins B N, Jambunathan  K, Wu  X  P and 
Ju X  Y  1993 A comparison of  interrogation  methods for 
particle image velocimetry  Proc. SPIE 2005 478-89 
Backer  D B and Fourney  M  E  1977 Measuring fluid velocities 
with speckle patterns Opt. Lett.  1 135-7 
- 
1989 Engineering applications of  particle image 
Cenedese A and Paglialunga  A  1990 Digital direct analysis  of a 
multiexposed photograph  in  PIV Exp.  Fluids  8 2 7 3 4 0  
Gonzalez R  C and Wintz P A  1987 Digital Image Processing 
(Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley) 
Hassan  Y A and Canaan R  E  1941 Full-Geld bubbly flow 
velocity measurements  using  a multiframe  particle  tracking 
technique fip. Fluids  12 49-60 
imurovement of  PIV. Part I: limitation of conventional 
Huang H T, Fiedler  H E and  Wang J J  1993a Limitation  and 
techniques due to deformation of  particle image patterns 
Erp. Fluidr  15 168-74 
particle image distortion.  a novel  technique Exp.  Fluids  15 
263-73 
- 1993b Limitation  and improvement  of PIV. Part 11: 
Kabdyashi T 1988 Flow  visualization  image analysis review  2nd 
Int. Symp.  on Fluid-Control.  Measuremenl, Mechanics  and 
Flow  Ksslralisation pp 545-56 
Kimura I,  Kimura  H and Takamori T 1988 Image processing 
of  flow velocity  vector distributions 2nd  Int. Symp. 
on Fluid-Control, Measurement,  Mechanics  and  Flow 
VisuaIisarion pp  189-93 
around a circular  cylinder by  using  correlation  technique 
Flow  Ksualization IV  (Washington: Hemisphere) pp 221-6 
Prasad A  K,  Adrian  R  J ,   Landrcth C C and Offutt P  W  1992 
Effect of resolution  on the speed  and accuracy  of particle 
image velocimetry  interrogation Exp.  Fliiids  13 105-16 
Utami T and Blackwelder  R  F 1991 A cross-correlation 
technique  for velocity  field extraction from particle 
visualization Exp.  Fluids  10 213-23 
resolution Proc. SPIE 2005 674.-35
Kimura 1 and Takamori  T 1986 Image processing  of flow 
Westerweel J   1993 Analysis of  PIV interrogation with  low  pixel 
Willert C E and Charib M  1991 Digital Darticle image 
velocimetry E   q    
Fluids  10 l8i-93' 
- 
Wu  W  Y  1982 Fluid Mechanics  (Beiiinp:  Beiiine  Univenitv 
.  _ II -  
Press)  (in Chinese) 
514 
View publication stats
View publication stats
