See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/245425691
Flow Structure on a Delta Wing of Low Sweep Angle
Article??in??AIAA Journal ・ March 2004
DOI: 10.2514/1.1207
CITATIONS
80
READS
615
2 authors, including:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
ANN, Predicting, Wind Potential View project
ESTIMATION OF THE SOLAR RADIATION MODEL USING MEASURED DATA OF OSMAN?YE, TURKEY View project
B. Yaniktepe
Osmaniye Korkut Ata university
44 PUBLICATIONS???355 CITATIONS???
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by B. Yaniktepe on 08 April 2016.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
P1: ILT/GUB        P2: ILT
AIAA [aiaaj]        9:52    22 January 2004              March’2004 #10-J26594(A)/Yaniktepe
AIAA JOURNAL
Vol. 42, No. 3, March 2004
Flow Structure on a Delta Wing of Low Sweep Angle
B. Yaniktepe? and D. Rockwell†
Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania 18015
The instantaneous and averaged flow structure past a delta wing of low sweep angle is investigated using a tech-
nique of high-image-density particle image velocimetry. Emphasis is on crossflow planes, where vortex breakdown
and stall occur, and the identification of buffeting mechanisms in these regions. At all values of angle of attack
up to the fully stalled condition, the averaged vorticity layer exhibits an elongated form; the classical (single)
large-scale concentration of vorticity within the leading-edge vortex of a highly swept wing is not present. At low
angle of attack α, this elongated, averaged layer can exhibit, however, well-defined concentrations of vorticity.
These elongated vorticity layers are accompanied by narrow recirculation zones adjacent to the wing surface.
Furthermore, the averaged streamline topology exhibits, at lower α, a saddle point located slightly outboard of the
leading edge, in contrast to a saddle point located on the plane of the symmetry of a highly swept wing. Patterns
of velocity fluctuation and Reynolds stress show peaks that are generally coincident with large values of averaged
vorticity, which indicates that they arise from unsteady events in regions of high shear. Well-defined concentrations
of instantaneous vorticity can be identified at all values of angle of attack α. At low αindividual concentrations
retain their identity, but at moderate and high αlarger-scale clusters of instantaneous vorticity occur. In turn,
these patterns of vorticity are in accord with the time-averaged spectra of the fluctuating velocity; the predominant
peaks of such spectra take on lower values in regions where larger-scale clusters of vorticity appear. Control in
the form of a small amplitude perturbation of the wing, at a frequency corresponding to the subharmonic of the
spectral component in the initial region of development of the separated layer, can restabilize the time-averaged
patterns of streamline topology and vorticity, such that they resemble those occurring at lower angle of attack α.
Nomenclature
C        =    root chord, mm
f         =    frequency, Hz
f0           =    frequency of spectral peak of velocity fluctuation, Hz
S         =    local semispan of wing, mm
T        =    period of perturbed angle of attack α, deg
U        =    freestream velocity, mm/s
V        =    magnitude of velocity vector, mm/s
v′         =    instantaneous velocity fluctuation in direction
parallel to surface of wing, mm/s
w′        =    instantaneous velocity fluctuation normal
to surface of wing, mm/s
wrms      =    rms of velocity fluctuation, mm/s
x         =    distance from apex measured along
plane of symmetry of wing, mm
xb′        =    distance from apex measured along axis
of leading-edge vortex, mm
y         =    distance from apex measured normal
to plane of symmetry of wing, mm
α      =    angle of attack, deg
α    =    perturbation of angle of attack α, deg
      =    sweep angle, deg
λ      =    wavelength between vorticity concentrations, mm
ψ      =    streamfunction, mm2
ω      =    vorticity, 1/s
      =    time-averaged value of quantity
Received 28 March 2003; revision received 8 September 2003; accepted
for publication 9 September 2003. Copyright c 2003 by B. Yaniktepe and
D. Rockwell. Published by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astro-
nautics, Inc., with permission. Copies of this paper may be made for personal
or internal use, on condition that the copier pay the $10.00 per-copy fee to
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA
01923; include the code 0001-1452/04 $10.00 in correspondence with the
CCC.
?Visiting Scientist, Department of Mechanical Engineering and Mechan-
ics; currently Research Assistant, Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Cukurova University, Adana, Turkey.
†Paul B. Reinhold Professor, Department of Mechanical Engineering and
Mechanics,  356  Packard  Laboratory,  19  Memorial  Drive  West.  Member
AIAA.
I.    Introduction
IN
recent  years,  considerable  insight  has  been  gained  into  the
averaged and unsteady structure on delta wings having relatively
large sweep angle. These investigations, which are described in the
following, serve as a basis for interpretation of the flow structure on
wings of moderate sweep angle, which is the focus of the present
investigation.
A.    Large-Scale Patterns of Flow Structure
Global experimental techniques, such as particle image velocime-
try (PIV), have provided a basis for interpretation of the averaged
crossflow structure on highly swept wings. Regarding the stream-
line topology, Magness et al.1  defined, via PIV, the critical points
associated with the leading-edge vortices having spiral streamline
patterns with well-defined centers. A saddle point, that is, an ap-
parent  intersection  of  streamlines,  occurred  at  the  plane  of  sym-
metry of the wing. At sufficiently high angle of attack, however,
the streamline pattern exhibits features not characteristic of a clas-
sical leading-edge vortex. Visbal and Gordnier2  performed related
numerical simulations, which yielded interpretation of the various
topologies of streamline patterns on highly swept delta wings.
Topological representations of the flow on the basis of stream-
lines are linked to patterns of vorticity on the crossflow plane. A
well-known feature on wings of high sweep angle is the existence
of  a  large-scale  vorticity  concentration  at  the  apparent  center  of
the leading-edge vortex. This pattern of vorticity is well-established
and in accord with, for example, the laser Doppler anemometry mea-
surements of Riley and Lowson3  and the aforementioned imaging
of Magness et al.1
Whereas  the  aforementioned  investigations  focused  on  wings
having relatively high sweep angle, much less is known of the av-
eraged flow structure on wings with moderate or low sweep angle.
Ol and Gharib4  compared the flow structure on wings having sweep
angles of  = 50 and 65 deg, using a technique of stereo imaging.
Based on patterns of averaged velocity and vorticity in the crossflow
plane, they show that the wing of low sweep angle of  = 50 deg ex-
hibits distinctive features, especially at a higher angle of attack, as a
result of the earlier onset of vortex breakdown and a large-scale col-
lapse of the rolled-up, leading-edge vortex structure. Gursul et al.5
point out several interesting features of dye-visualized vortex cores
513
P1: ILT/GUB        P2: ILT
AIAA [aiaaj]        9:52    22 January 2004              March’2004 #10-J26594(A)/Yaniktepe
514                                                                                                YANIKTEPE AND ROCKWELL
on wings of various planforms having relatively low sweepbreak
angle.
B.    Small-Scale Patterns of Flow Structure
The occurrence of small-scale vortical (subvortical) structures is
well known. Their quantitative, time-averaged features have been
assessed in detail by Riley and Lowson,3  who undertook an exten-
sive study, using laser Doppler anemometry, of the flow structure
on a wing of sweep angle  = 85 deg. On the basis of averaged vor-
ticity measurements, they revealed a system of steady, corotating,
small-scale vortices. These substructures were observed in earlier
investigations by Payne et al.,6  Lowson,7  and Reynolds and Abtahi8
using visualization techniques and more recently by Washburn and
Visser9   and  Mitchell  et  al.10   via  time-averaged  measurements  of
the flow structure. Visbal and Gordnier11  and Gordnier and Visbal12
performed the first numerical simulations of the instantaneous struc-
ture on wings of relatively large and small sweep angle respectively.
They  demonstrated  that  steady  substructures  are  apparent  in  the
time-averaged  (mean)  patterns  of  the  transitional  turbulent  shear
layer from the leading edge.
In parallel with the investigation of the aforementioned steady
substructures,  Riley  and  Lowson3   addressed  time-dependent  in-
stabilities from the leading edge of a delta wing. These unstable
structures were first observed by Gad-el-Hak and Blackwelder.13
Recently,  Ozgoren  et  al.14   provided  an  additional  perspective  on
this instability. Lowson,7  using smoke visualization, characterized
both this unsteady type of instability, as well as the aforementioned
steady, subvortical instability, and noted that their coexistence could
result in interaction and thereby interference between the two basic
forms of instabilities. Lowson7   indicates that the unsteady struc-
tures can coalesce, or merge, in a similar spirit as for the classical
two-dimensional mixing layer addressed by Winant and Browand.15
Gordnier and Visbal16  performed the first computations of the un-
steady substructures in the shear layer from the leading edge, and
Gordnier and Visbal17,18  further characterized features of the un-
steady instability from the leading edge; it was coupled with un-
steady boundary-layer separation from the leeward surface of the
wing. Cipolla and Rockwell19  demonstrated, via quantitative imag-
ing, existence of small-scale structures consistent with the afore-
mentioned simulations. Additional features of instabilities from the
leading edge are addressed by Visbal and Gordnier11  and Gordnier
and Visbal.12
In a more general sense, several types of physical mechanisms
can contribute to unsteadiness of the flow structure, at least for suf-
ficiently large values of sweep angle. They include the helical mode
instability  of  vortex  breakdown,  as  characterized  for  an  internal
flow by Garg and Leibovich,20  and flow past a delta wing of large
sweep angle by Gursul,21  as well as other mechanisms summarized
and classified by Menke et al.22  At lower values of sweep angle of
attack, Gordnier and Visbal12 have shown that pronounced unsteadi-
ness can arise from periodic wandering of the vortex core, which is
caused by a complex interaction of vortices from the leading edge
and the leeward surface of the wing.
The possibility of controlling the unsteady structure on a delta
wing by application of small amplitude perturbations has been ad-
dressed by Gad-el-Hak and Blackwelder,23  who demonstrated the
consequence of small-amplitude pulsations of flow through the edge
of a delta wing on the instability. Ozgoren et al.24  characterized the
effect of perturbations of the entire wing on the time-averaged fea-
tures of the multiple shear layer structure of the leading-edge vortex,
including the onset of vortex breakdown.
C.    Unresolved Issues
1.    Averaged Structure of Shear Layer from Leading Edge of Wing
Of  primary  interest  in  recent  years  has  been  the  structure  of
leading-edge vortices from slender wings of relatively high sweep
angle. For the case of a wing with low sweep angle (less than 40 deg),
the averaged, quantitative structure has received very little attention.
The issue arises as to what degree a well-defined vortex core, in the
form  of  a  single-large-scale  concentration  of  vorticity,  can  exist,
particularly in regions where vortex breakdown and the onset of
stall are prevalent, which is the focus of the present investigation.
Correspondingly, the streamline topology and the possible existence
and location of saddle points in the crossflow plane have not been
pursued. At sufficiently high angle of attack, the manner in which
this topology is altered, in relation to development of gross stall on
the wing surface, remains unclarified. Such changes in the topo-
logical features are expected to influence the time-averaged forces
and moments on the wing and thereby the steady-state performance
characteristics.
2.    Unsteady Features of Separated Layer Adjacent to Surface of Wing
It is anticipated that the vorticity layer adjacent to the surface
of the wing will exhibit significant unsteadiness, especially when
vortex breakdown/stall occur. The relationship between the patterns
of fluctuating velocity amplitude and averaged vorticity over the
crossflow plane has not been addressed for a wing of low sweep
angle. These features are, of course, related to the instantaneous,
whole-field patterns of discrete vortical structures and whether they
retain their identity or give way to larger-scale clusters. This instan-
taneous structure, in turn, will be related to the spectral content of
the velocity fluctuation(s) as a function of distance along the sep-
arated layer adjacent to the wing surface. These aspects have not
been pursued. A knowledge of the successive, instantaneous states
of the flow, and their assessment using spectral analysis techniques,
can provide insight into the origin of unsteady buffet loading of the
wing. This information could potentially be used in semi-empirical
models that relate the flow structure above the wing to the unsteady
pressure at its surface.
3.    Control of Flow Structure by Leading-Edge Perturbations
The consequence of small-amplitude perturbations of the leading
edge, at an appropriate frequency, on the time-averaged pattern of
the separated shear layer adjacent to the wing surface, has not been
addressed.  The  perturbation  that  yields  the  largest  change  in  the
flow pattern should be defined, in relation to the inherent formation
frequency of vortical structures from the edge. An understanding
of this type of control concept could yield practical techniques for
controlling the forces and moments on a wing by alteration of the
flow structure.
The  aim  of  this  investigation  is  to  pursue  these  unresolved
concepts  by  use  of  a  technique  of  high-image-density  PIV  and
appropriate   processing   of   selected   and   cinema   sequences   of
images.
II.    Experimental System and Techniques
All experiments were undertaken in a large-scale water channel
facility. Flow is pumped into a large settling tank and passes through
a system of honeycomb and screen, followed by a 2:1 contraction
that is connected to the main test section, which has a length of
4928 mm, a width of 927 mm, and a depth of 610 mm. The freestream
turbulence intensity at the entrance to this test section is less than
0.1%.
The design of the delta wing was based on consideration of key
elements of planforms representing unmanned combat air vehicles,
which  typically  have  a  low-to-moderate  values  of  sweep  angle.
Based on these considerations, the sweep angle of the wing was
specified as  = 38.7 deg. The chord C  was 101.6 mm, and the
total span at the trailing edge was 254 mm. The thickness of the
wing was 3 mm, and its leading edges were beveled on the wind-
ward side at an angle of 30 deg. For all experiments, the value of
Reynolds number based on chord C was maintained at 103, which
corresponded to a freestream velocity U = 98.8 mm/s. The wing
was maintained in a nominally horizontal position by a slender sup-
port strut that extended vertically from the midchord of the wing.
This strut had a width of 4 mm and a streamwise length of 35 mm.
Assessment of this type of strut arrangement involved comparison
with complementary experiments involving a nominally horizontal
sting and comparison of the location of vortex breakdown for wings
of different sweep angle. This strut arrangement had an insignificant
effect on the flow structure on the leeward side of the wing.
P1: ILT/GUB        P2: ILT
AIAA [aiaaj]        9:52    22 January 2004              March’2004 #10-J26594(A)/Yaniktepe
YANIKTEPE AND ROCKWELL                                                                                                              515
Fig. 1    Schematic of experimental arrangement showing delta wing,
laser-sheet location, and definition of key parameters.
The present investigation focuses on global, instantaneous pat-
terns of the flow structure, which are acquired in a cinema sequence
using a technique of high-image-density PIV. This approach not only
provides the sequence of instantaneous states of the flow structure
but also serves as the basis for determination of time-averaged rep-
resentations. The flow is seeded with 12-μm metallic-coated hollow
plastic spheres, which are essentially neutrally buoyant. The seed-
ing density of these particles was sufficiently large, such that the
high-image-density criterion was satisfied. These particles were il-
luminated by a dual-pulsed Yag laser system, which has a maximum
output of 90 mJ. To generate a laser sheet of desired thickness, focal
distance, and orientation, the laser beam was transmitted through
a system of cylindrical and spherical lenses. An overview of the
laser-sheet location, relative to the delta wing, is provided in Fig. 1.
For the present investigation, it was determined, on the basis of pre-
liminary experiments, that the major features of the flow structure
could best be determined at the streamwise location x/C = 0.8, and
therefore this position of the laser sheet is employed in the present
study. Furthermore, preliminary dye visualization, as well as initial
PIV experiments, showed that the characteristic states of the flow
structure were well represented by angles of attack α = 7, 13, 17,
and 25 deg, and therefore these values were employed for detailed
imaging. This dye visualization indicates that the axis of the vortex
was at an angle of 30 deg with respect to the plane of symmetry
of the wing. The angle between the nominal axis of the vortex and
the aforementioned plane of the laser sheet was therefore 60 deg,
rather than an angle of 90 deg, which would correspond to perfect
alignment of the axis of the vortex and the surface normal of the
plane of the laser sheet. The patterns of flow topology characterized
in the plane of the laser sheet must therefore be viewed as those on a
skewed plane. This skew angle can alter the affected locations of cer-
tain critical points of the topology, relative to the locations deduced
from viewing on a plane orthogonal to the axis of the vortex. A fur-
ther aspect of the field of view corresponding to the plane of the laser
sheet is that the flow structures was characterized over half the wing,
rather than the entire spanwise extent of the wing, in order to maxi-
mize spatial resolution of the measurements. As a consequence, it is
not possible to monitor time-dependent variations of the processes
of vortex breakdown and stall on opposing sides of the wing.
Images were acquired at a framing rate of 15 frames per second,
thereby providing a cinema series of instantaneous images. These
images were recorded on a high-resolution camera having an array
of 1024 × 1024 pixels. Because the characteristic frequencies of the
unsteady events were significantly smaller than the framing rate, it
is possible to perform autospectral and cross-spectral analysis of
the flow structure at a large number of points over the plane of the
imaging, thereby yielding averaged spectral representations, all of
which are based on the same time record.
Patterns of instantaneous velocity vectors were calculated using
a cross-correlation technique between successive patterns of par-
ticle images, which resulted from illumination by the dual-pulsed
laser system. In essence, two interrogation windows were employed:
32 × 32  pixels  and  16 × 16  pixels,  referred  to  as  low-  and  high-
resolution cases herein. For both windows, an effective overlap of
50% was used, in order to satisfy the Nyquist criterion. This ap-
proach resulted in effective grid sizes of 2.62 mm in the plane of
the laser sheet. The minimum number of particle images contained
within a given window boundary was 15 to 20, respectively, thereby
exceeding the criterion for high image density.
III.    Dye Visualization
Representative dye visualization is shown in Fig. 2 for the case
of the stationary wing at three values of angle of attack α. At the
lowest two values of α = 7 and 13 deg, dye was injected from two
localized ports on the windward surface located close to the apex of
the wing. At α = 7 deg, the apparent centerlines of the leading-edge
vortices are designated, and it is clear that initial disruptions of the
marker can occur, at locations of the order of 0.3 to 0.5C, in which C
is the chord of the wing. At locations sufficiently far downstream, at
x/C = 0.6 to 0.8, a large-scale widening of the marker occurs. This
two-stage process of vortex breakdown, that is, an initial disruption,
then a large-scale widening, has a form remarkably similar to the
computations of Gordnier and Visbal for a wing of low sweep an-
gle  = 50 deg. This overall pattern of vortex breakdown therefore
appears to be an inherent feature of the flow structure on wings of
low sweep angle.
At α = 13 deg, the streamwise extent of the organized portion of
the dye marker emanating from the apex is very short. The central
portion of the wing is unmarked by dye because it is continuously
swept downstream past the trailing edge. On the other hand, the
regions  of  the  wing  outboard  of  this  central  portion  show  a  low
velocity region of dye adjacent to the surface.
At 17 deg, the entire wing is filled with a region of low-velocity
dye, as shown in Fig. 2c. In presence of an applied, small-amplitude
perturbation, shown in Fig. 2d, the flow structure of the visualized
pattern at α = 17 deg resembles, in a general sense, the structure at
α = 13 deg on the stationary wing.
Taken together, the foregoing visualizations suggest overall fea-
tures of the flow patterns, which are addressed herein using quanti-
tative imaging of the instantaneous and averaged flow structure.
IV.    Averaged Velocity and Streamline Topology
Figure  3  shows  patterns  of  time-averaged  velocity  V   and
streamlines  corresponding to the flow structure at  x = 0.8C.
In this and subsequent figures, the semispan S corresponds to the
local value of S at a given value of dimensionless chordwise distance
s/C; it does not have a single value corresponding to the value of
the semispan at the trailing-edge x/C = 1. In Fig. 3 and subsequent
figures, the fact that only a fraction of the local semispan S is shown
arises from the variable zoom during image acquisition. Comparison
with the dye-visualization image of Fig. 2 shows that the chordwise
location x/C = 0.8 lies within the region. In Fig. 3 and subsequent
figures, the fact that only a fraction of the local semispan S is shown
arises from the variable zoom during image acquisition.
Comparison with the dye-visualization image of Fig. 2 shows that
the chordwise location x/C = 0.8 lies within the region of signif-
icant disruption of the dye marker at α = 7 deg and is well down-
stream of the substantial widening of the dye marker at α = 13 deg.
At α = 17 and 25 deg (not shown), dye simply floods the surface
of the wing, which suggests that the region near the surface flow
pattern on the wing is fully stalled. Remarkably, however, all of the
patterns of Fig. 3 show a definable time-averaged structure.
At α = 7?17 deg an identifiable interface exists between a region
of high velocity flow below the wing and very low velocity imme-
diately adjacent to the wing. In other words, at this interface this
velocity  field  is  characteristic  of  a  separated  free-shear  layer.  At
P1: ILT/GUB        P2: ILT
AIAA [aiaaj]        9:52    22 January 2004              March’2004 #10-J26594(A)/Yaniktepe
516                                                                                                YANIKTEPE AND ROCKWELL
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig. 2    Dye visualization at three representative angles of attack. For images α= 7 and 13 deg, dye is injected through two discrete ports at the apex
of the wing, whereas at α= 17 deg, dye is injected along the leading edge on the windward side of the wing. For the perturbed wing, the perturbation
amplitude and period are α0 = 1 deg and T = 0.5 s.
Fig. 3    Patterns of averaged velocity V and streamline Ψ topology at four values of angle of attack α= 7, 13, 17, and 25 deg. Laser sheet is located
at x/C = 0.8. Spanwise extent of wing corresponds to 0.82 S at α= 7 and 13 deg and 0.94 S at α= 17 and 25 deg, in which S is the semispan of the delta
wing at the location of the laser sheet x/C = 0.8.
P1: ILT/GUB        P2: ILT
AIAA [aiaaj]        9:52    22 January 2004              March’2004 #10-J26594(A)/Yaniktepe
YANIKTEPE AND ROCKWELL                                                                                                              517
α = 25 deg, the interface region has a different form, and the spatial
extent of the very low velocity region is confined to a domain very
close to the surface of the wing. Unlike cases at low angle of attack,
the interface does not correspond to an abrupt decrease of velocity
between the exterior flow and the region of flow closer to the wing.
Rather, the magnitude of velocity is of the same order on either side
of the interface.
The  corresponding  streamline  topology,  which  is  constructed
from  these  averaged  velocity  fields,  indicates  a  saddle  point  at
α = 7 deg, which is designated by a circular dot. It appears well
below and slightly outboard of the leading edge of the wing. Fur-
thermore, the streamline pattern inside the major streamlines that
connect to the saddle point does not exhibit a well-defined swirl pat-
tern. All of these features of the streamline topology are distinctly
different from those associated with wings having relatively high
sweep angle, as characterized by Magness et al.1
At  α = 13  deg,  the  aforementioned  saddle  point  has  been  dis-
placed downward and lies outside of the field of view. A well-defined
Fig. 4    Patterns of averaged vorticity ω, contours of constant vertical (transverse) velocity fluctuation wrms/U, and Reynolds-stress correlation
v′w′/U2. Angles of attack are α= 7, 13, 17, and 25 deg. Laser sheet is located at x/C = 0.8. For contours of averaged vorticity, minimum and incremental
values are [ω]min = ??0.3 s?1  and ?[ω] = ??0.15 s?1. For contours of constant velocity fluctuation, [wrms/U]min = 0.025, and ?[wrms/U] = 0.005.
For contours of constant Reynolds-stress correlation, [v′w′/U2]min = ??0.0004, and ?[v′w′/U2] = ??0.0002. Spanwise extent of wing corresponds
to 1.0 S, in which S is the semispan of the delta wing at the location of the laser sheet x/C = 0.8.
swirl pattern exists. It does not emanate, however, from the leading
edge of the wing. Rather, it appears to originate from a saddle point
located at the position of the black dot. This displacement from the
leading edge of the wing is caused by the extensively separated flow,
evident by comparison with the dye visualization at α = 13 deg in
Fig. 2. A similar saddle point, which is displaced inboard from the
leading edge, is indicated by the black dot in the streamline topology
at α = 17 deg. Finally, at α = 25 deg an identifiable swirl pattern is
barely evident, and the entire streamline topology takes on an un-
conventional form, as a result of the highly stalled flow over the
surface of the wing.
V.    Patterns of Averaged Vorticity
and Fluctuating Velocity
In Fig. 4, patterns of time-averaged vorticity ω are compared
with the rms of the transverse (vertical) velocity fluctuation wrms
normalized by the freestream velocity U, that is, wrms/U, as well as
P1: ILT/GUB        P2: ILT
AIAA [aiaaj]        9:52    22 January 2004              March’2004 #10-J26594(A)/Yaniktepe
518                                                                                                YANIKTEPE AND ROCKWELL
with the Reynolds-stress correlation v′w′/U2, for angles of attack
α = 7, 13, 17, and 25 deg.
To allow direct comparison, the minimum and incremental values
of all contour patterns of averaged vorticity ω in Fig. 4 are main-
tained the same at all values of α = 7, 13, 17, and 25 deg. Similarly,
the same minimum and incremental values are maintained for the
contours of wrms/U and v′w′/U2.
Consider, first, the patterns of averaged vorticity ω at α = 7 and
13 deg. They take the form of an elongated layer with one or two
vorticity extrema. Comparison with Fig. 3 shows that, along each
of these layers, the maximum value of vorticity ω corresponds
to  the  interface  between  regions  of  high  and  low  velocity  in  the
corresponding plots of averaged velocity V  at α = 7 and 13 deg.
That is, the elongated layers are characteristic of a free-shear layer
as viewed in this crossflow plane. Furthermore, the pattern of ω
at α = 17 deg in Fig. 4 has a generally similar form, but the loci
of maximum vorticity are at a less well-defined interface between
higher and lower velocities. It is evident that, however, at this larger
angle of attack the peak value of vorticity is not as large as at α = 7
and 13 deg. Finally, at the largest angle of attack α = 25 deg, the
form  of  the  vorticity  pattern  ω is  fundamentally  different.  The
elongated region of vorticity no longer appears to emanate from the
leading edge of the wing. Furthermore, the peak values of vorticity
no longer occur at the interface referred to in the pattern of V  at
α = 25 deg in Fig. 3. Remarkably, the peak values of vorticity are
further reduced from those at α = 17 deg.
It is appropriate to compare the elongated layers of vorticity ωat,
for example, α = 7 and 13 deg in Fig. 4, with the corresponding pat-
terns of streamline topology in Fig. 3. The location of an extremum
of vorticity is not always coincident with the focus (apparent center)
of the streamline pattern, and, furthermore, the spatial extent of the
large-scale swirl pattern of streamlines is substantially larger than
the thickness of the elongated vorticity layer. These observations are
apparently caused by the very rapidly distorting flow that separates
from the leading edge of the wing and, in fact, directly analogous
patterns of averaged vorticity and streamline topology, including
the lack of precise correspondence between them, that have been
observed in the very near wake of a cylinder, where the plane of ob-
servation is orthogonal to the axis of the separating shear layer. As
shown, for example, by Akilli and Rockwell,25  an elongated vortic-
ity layer, which does not culminate in a single, large-scale vortical
structure,  is  nevertheless  associated  with  a  pattern  of  streamline
topology having a well-defined swirl pattern with a focus.
The aforementioned values of vorticity ω are related to the nor-
malized component of vertical velocity fluctuation wrms/U, at least
for the lower values of angle of attack α = 7, 13, and 17 deg. For
these values of α, the locations of maximum values of wrms/U can
be tracked as a function of spanwise distance along each elongated
pattern of wrms/U. These maxima generally follow the peak val-
ues  of  ω.  That  is,  the  largest  velocity  fluctuations  occur  in  the
region of maximum vorticity and thereby at the interfaces in the
patterns of V  shown in Fig. 3.
In turn, the patterns of velocity fluctuation wrms/U are associated
with the Reynolds-stress correlation v′w′/U2, that is, with the de-
gree of turbulence production in the free-shear flow, at least at angles
of attack α = 7, 13, and 17 deg. The largest values of v′w′/U2 tend
to occur approximately at half the semispan S, that is, at 0.5 S for all
values of angle of attack α = 7?17 deg. The loci of extrema of the
correlation v′w′/U2  are generally in accord with the maxima of
wrms/U. In fact, the peak magnitude of the correlation v′w′/U2
increases with angle of attack α = 7?17 deg.
At the highest angle of attack α = 25 deg, the patterns have a fun-
damentally different form. The pattern of wrms/U  is substantially
broader than at lower angle of attack, and, moreover, the peak value
is substantially lower than at α = 17 deg. Regarding the correspond-
ing Reynolds-stress correlation v′w′/U2, its value is substantially
lower than at α = 17 deg. This remarkable attenuation of the fluctuat-
ing velocity magnitude, and the corresponding Reynolds-stress cor-
relation is associated with the radical change of the pattern of veloc-
ity V and streamline topology shown at α = 25 deg in Fig. 3. In
essence, the loss of identity of the shear-layer interface and the elon-
gated vorticity layer emanating from the leading edge of the wing,
which are present at lower angle of attack α = 7?17 deg, yield a sub-
stantial reduction in the magnitude of the fluctuating velocity field.
VI.    Instantaneous Patterns of Vorticity
The patterns of velocity fluctuation wrms/U and Reynolds-stress
correlation  v′w′/U2   described  in  Sec.  V  are  intimately  related
to the patterns of instantaneous vorticity and their evolution with
time. Figure 5 shows two randomly selected patterns of instanta-
neous vorticity at each angle of attack α = 7?25 deg. At α = 7 deg,
the individual vorticity concentrations retain their identity along the
surface of the wing. That is, interaction between concentrations is
not evident. This pattern is also evident in Fig. 4, in a smoothed
version, as a result of the effects of time-averaging of fluctuations,
or jitter, of the instantaneous locations of the vorticity concentra-
tions. It is remarkably similar to that on a wing of low sweep an-
gle ( = 50 deg) at low angle of attack (α = 5 deg) computed by
Gordnier  and  Visbal.12   In  Fig.  5,  at  α = 7  deg  the  typical  wave-
length between these concentrations is λ/S = 0.25, in which S is the
semispan of the wing at the chordwise location of interest herein,
x/C = 0.8. On the other hand, at α = 13 deg, smaller-scale vorticity
concentrations, with a smaller wavelength λ/S = 0.15 are formed
immediately  after  separation  from  the  leading  edge  of  the  wing.
Note that these concentrations do not form directly from the edge,
but are initially identifiable along the surface of the wing inboard of
the edge. In fact, this feature is even more prevalent at high values
of α = 17 and 25 deg. Farther inboard, larger-scale clusters of vor-
ticity appear. At α = 17 deg, the initially formed concentrations also
have a relatively small wavelength, which is not as clearly defined
as at lower α. The change in the patterns of instantaneous vorticity
ω at successive values of α = 7, 13, and 17 deg is associated with a
substantial increase in both velocity fluctuation amplitude wrms/U
and Reynolds-stress correlation v′w′/U2, which is evident from
cross comparison of the images at α = 7, 13, and 17 deg in Fig. 4.
On the other hand, at the highest angle of attack α = 25 deg de-
fined clusters of vorticity are first detectable at a significant distance
inboard from the leading edge. Such patterns are associated with
relatively low values of the Reynolds-stress correlation v′w′/U2
and velocity fluctuation wrms/U, evident at α = 25 deg in the images
of Fig. 4. The occurrence of large-scale stall at α = 25 deg there-
fore results in a reduction in level of the unsteadiness, relative to
lower values of α where a well-defined separated shear layer, that
is, vorticity layer, is located adjacent to the surface of the wing.
VII.    Spectra Along Separated Vorticity Layer
As shown in Fig. 4, the elongated vorticity layers from the leading
edge are associated with corresponding patterns of vertical velocity
fluctuation amplitude wrms/U, and at lower values of angle of attack
α the peak values of wrms/U  follow the peak values of averaged
vorticity ω. In Fig. 6, for each value of angle of attack α spectra
of the transverse (vertical) velocity fluctuation were evaluated at
successive locations along the locus of maximum wrms/U. These
locations  are  indicated  by  the  solid  black  points  on  each  of  the
patterns of wrms/U for angles of attack α = 7, 13, 17, and 25 deg.
At  α = 7  deg,  the  frequency   f0    of  the  spectral  peak  is  at
f0 = 3.4 Hz, and the largest amplitude of this spectral peak occurs at
the maximum of wrms/U, which is well inboard of the leading edge.
Then, as the surface of the wing is approached this peak is rapidly at-
tenuated, and barely detectable. The form of these spectra is directly
related to the patterns of instantaneous vorticity concentrations, as
shown at α = 7 deg in Fig. 5.
At α = 13 deg, the spectral peak closest to the leading edge, which
is relatively broad, is initially centered at  f0 = 4.6 Hz. For increasing
distance along the vorticity layer, peaks at lower values of  f0  are
evident; they lie in the range 2.4 ? f0 ? 3.2 Hz. This lowering of the
peak frequency  f0  is consistent with the occurrence of larger-scale
vortical structures shown at α = 13 deg in Fig. 5.
Similarly,  at  α = 17  deg  the  initial,  broad  spectral  peak  has  a
relatively high center frequency  f0 = 4.1 Hz. Farther along the layer,
two peaks are evident at  f0 = 2.1 and 3.2 Hz, and, finally, a relatively
low-frequency component is apparent at  f0 = 0.5 Hz, as the shear
P1: ILT/GUB        P2: ILT
AIAA [aiaaj]        9:52    22 January 2004              March’2004 #10-J26594(A)/Yaniktepe
YANIKTEPE AND ROCKWELL                                                                                                              519
Fig. 5    Patterns of instantaneous vorticity ωat two randomly selected instants from a cinema sequence. Angles of attack are α= 7, 13, 17, and 25 deg.
Minimum and incremental values are ωmin = ??1.5 s?1  and ?ω= ??0.25 s?1. Spanwise extent of wing corresponds to 1.0 S, in which S is the semispan
of the delta wing at the location of the laser sheet x/C = 0.8.
Fig. 6    Spectra Sw  of velocity fluctuation at selected locations in separated shear layer. Each spectrum is referenced to the indicated location in the
pattern of constant contours of wrms/U. Parameters for these contour levels are given in Fig. 4. Spanwise extent of wing corresponds to 1.0 S, in which
S is the semispan of the delta wing at the location of the laser sheet x/C = 0.8.
P1: ILT/GUB        P2: ILT
AIAA [aiaaj]        9:52    22 January 2004              March’2004 #10-J26594(A)/Yaniktepe
520                                                                                                YANIKTEPE AND ROCKWELL
layer approaches the surface of the wing. This successive lowering
of the values of  f0  is again associated with the occurrence of larger-
scale vortical structures along the shear layer.
At the highest angle of attack α = 25 deg, a reasonably defined,
somewhat broadband peak is detectable at a location well inboard of
the leading edge. This predominant peak is centered at  f0 = 3.4 Hz
and moves to a lower value of  f0 = 2.5 Hz farther along the layer. At
this high angle of attack, it is apparent that the occurrence of larger-
scale vortical structures along the separated vorticity layer still plays
a role in shifting the broadly defined peak at  f0 to lower frequencies.
Viewing  the  patterns  of  spectra  at  all  values  of  α in  Fig.  6,  it
is evident that, at the smallest angles of attack α = 7 and 13 deg,
the eventual reattachment of the shear layer to the surface of the
wing, evident in patterns of averaged velocity of Fig. 3 and vorticity
of Fig. 4, is associated with attenuation of the predominant spectral
peak. At a sufficiently high angle of attack α = 17 deg, this tendency
toward reattachment is associated with the appearance of a very low
frequency. At α = 25 deg, such reattachment does not occur, and a
defined, but relatively broadband, peak persists.
The dimensionless frequencies of the spectral peaks at  f0   can
be  expressed  as   f0C/U.  For  the  spectra  of  Fig.  6,  the  identi-
fiable  spectral  peaks  in  the  early  stages  of  development  of  the
shear  layer  are  in  the  range  3.3 ? f0 ? 4.6  Hz,  which  corre-
spond to 3.39 ? f0C/U ? 4.73. Farther along the separated layer,
where  larger-scale  clusters  of  vorticity  occur,  the  range  of  val-
ues  is  lower,  that  is,  0.5  Hz ? f0 ? 3.2,  which  correspond  to
0.51 ? f0C/U ? 3.29. This range of  f0C/U  is remarkably simi-
lar to the band of identifiable frequencies in a spectrum computed
Fig. 7    Effect of small perturbations of wing on time-averaged patterns of velocity V and streamlines Ψ, relative to the case of he stationary wing.
Perturbation amplitude is α0 = 1 deg, and mean angle of attack is α￣= 17 deg. Perturbation is applied according to α(t) = α￣+ α0 sin(2πt/T). Values of
perturbation period T are T = 0.5, 1.0, and 1.5 s. Spanwise extent of wing corresponds to 1.0 S, in which S is the semispan of the delta wing at the
location of the laser sheet x/C = 0.8.
by Gordnier and Visbal12  in the region downstream of vortex break-
down on a wing of low sweep angle  = 50 deg.
As  indicated  in  the  citations  in  Sec.  I,  several  physical  mech-
anisms  can  contribute  to  unsteadiness  of  the  flow  structure  on  a
delta wing. Menke et al.,22  as well as works of Gursul cited therein,
provide a classification of types of unsteadiness for wings having
relatively large values of sweep angle  = 65 to 75 deg. Most rel-
evant to our present considerations is the occurrence of 1) vortex
shedding,  typically  when  the  vortex  breakdown  location  reaches
the apex of the wing (0.25 ? f0/C/U ? 0.6); 2) unsteadiness as-
sociated with the helical mode of instability of vortex breakdown
(1.0 ? f0/C/U ? 4); and 3) the small-scale Kelvin?Helmholtz in-
stability of the shear layer separating from the leading edge of the
wing (6 ? f0/C/U ? 30). For a wing having a relatively low sweep
angle, for example,  = 38.7 deg of the present study, this type of
detailed classification is not available.
As  indicated  in  the  foregoing  images,  a  classical  vortex  core,
marked by an approximately circular region of vorticity, does not
exist in the images of the vorticity layer formed from the leading
edge. It is therefore questionable that one can speak of a helical
mode instability of vortex breakdown on wings of such low sweep.
In fact, for the wing of relatively low sweep angle  = 38.7 deg
investigated herein, it is apparent from the dye visualization at, for
example, α = 7 deg in Fig. 2, that a well-defined spiral, or bubble
mode  of  vortex  breakdown,  does  not  occur.  For  all  values  of  α
considered herein, the crossflow planes lie within regions of vortex
breakdown and stall, and maximum amplitudes of the spectra occur
well inboard of the leading edge. For the present purposes, vortex
P1: ILT/GUB        P2: ILT
AIAA [aiaaj]        9:52    22 January 2004              March’2004 #10-J26594(A)/Yaniktepe
YANIKTEPE AND ROCKWELL                                                                                                              521
breakdown is simply defined as a severe disruption of the core of the
vortex, as evident in the dye visualization of Fig. 2 at α = 7 deg. This
type of apparent breakdown might be associated with either jitter
of the nominally stationary vortical substructures or unsteadiness
associated with the fundamental or subharmonics of the inherent
instability of the shear layer separating from the leading edge.
VIII.    Effect of Controlled Perturbations on Averaged
and Instantaneous Structure
Preliminary experiments indicated that at sufficiently high angle
of attack, that is, α = 17 deg, the flow structure was particularly sen-
sitive to small-amplitude perturbations. On this basis, the delta wing
was subjected to perturbations about its midchord. The amplitude
α of these perturbations was kept small at α = 1 deg, while the
period T  of the perturbation was varied. The smallest period of os-
cillation was T = 0.5, that is,  f  = 2 Hz, which lies in the lower range
of frequency 0.5 ? f0 ? 3.15 of the self-excited instability, shown
in the spectra of Fig. 6. In fact, this value of the perturbation period
corresponds  to the frequency range of the coalesced, or  merged,
small-scale  vortical  structures  indicated  at  α = 17  deg  in  Fig.  5.
Fig. 8    Consequence of small-amplitude perturbation on patterns of averaged vorticity ω, rms of vertical (transverse) velocity fluctuation wrms/U,
and Reynolds stress correlation v′w′/U2. For patterns of vorticity, ωmin = ??0.4 s?1  and ?[ω] = ??0.2 s?1. For contours of constant wrms/U,
[wrms/U]min = 0.04, and ?[wrms/U] = 0.01. For contours of constant Reynolds-stress correlation, [v′w′/U2]min = ??0.001, and ?[v′w′/U2] = ??0.0005.
Spanwise extent of wing corresponds to 1.0 S, in which S is the semispan of the delta wing at the location of the laser sheet x/C = 0.8.
More specifically, T = 0.5 corresponds to the subharmonic of the
highest frequency  f0 =? 4 Hz in the initial region of the shear layer, as
shown in Fig. 6. In addition, larger values of T = 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 s
were applied, with T = 2.0 corresponding to  f  = 0.5 Hz, which is
the lowest low frequency in the spectrum at the location farthest
from the leading edge along the vorticity layer, as shown in Fig. 6.
Patterns  of  time-averaged  velocity  V  and   are  shown  in
Fig. 7. It is evident that the streamline topology undergoes a fun-
damental transformation, relative to the topology on the stationary
wing, evident by comparison of the top two images of Fig. 7. That
is, the topology is characteristic of a typical leading-edge vortex,
and, in fact, comparison with the topology at α = 13 deg for the
stationary wing in Fig. 3, shows a close similarity to the pattern of
T = 0.5 in Fig. 7. As the period of excitation is increased to values
of T = 1.0 and 1.5, the topology relaxes toward that of the station-
ary wing, that is, the center of the spiral streamline pattern moves
farther inboard and becomes less defined.
These changes in the patterns of velocity V  and the stream-
line  topology are associated with corresponding alterations of
the patterns of averaged vorticity ω, velocity fluctuation ampli-
tude wrms/U, and Reynolds stress v′w′/U2, as indicated in Fig. 8.
P1: ILT/GUB        P2: ILT
AIAA [aiaaj]        9:52    22 January 2004              March’2004 #10-J26594(A)/Yaniktepe
522                                                                                                YANIKTEPE AND ROCKWELL
Fig. 9    Comparison  of  representative  patterns  of  instantaneous  vor-
ticity  ω for  the  stationary  wing  and  the  wing  subjected  to  small-
amplitude  perturbations  according  to  α(t) = α￣ sine(ωt)  in  which  α￣
17 deg, α0 = 1 deg, and ω= 2πt/T. Minimum and incremental values
of vorticity are ωmin = ??1.5 s?1  and ?ω= ??0.25 s?1. Spanwise extent
of wing corresponds to 1.0 S, in which S is the semispan of the delta wing
at the location of the laser sheet x/C = 0.8.
Comparing, first, the patterns of ω, it is evident that the pertur-
bation at T = 0.5 results in a radically increased level of peak ω,
as well as an increase in the degree of organization of the distribu-
tion of ω, relative to the pattern of ω for the stationary wing.
At larger values of perturbation period T = 1.0 and 1.5, this peak
vorticity level decreases, and the ordered nature of the pattern is less
apparent.
The increase in level of averaged vorticity ω at T = 0.5 is ac-
companied by a substantial increase in the peak values of the velocity
fluctuation in wrms/U  and Reynolds-stress correlation v′w′/U2,
relative  to  the  case  of  the  stationary  wing.  At  the  highest  value
T = 1.5, these peak values have decreased significantly, relative to
those at T = 0.5.
The patterns of instantaneous vorticity associated with the pertur-
bation at T = 0.5 are shown in Fig. 9. It is evident that in presence of
the perturbation a relatively large-scale cluster of vorticity is formed,
as a result of the coalescence of a number of small-scale concen-
trations of vorticity. This larger-scale vorticity cluster forms closer
to the leading edge of the wing than the cluster on the stationary
wing. The physical mechanism for enhancement of the averaged
structure described in the foregoing therefore involves more rapid
development of patterns of coalesced vorticity.
IX.    Conclusions
The flow structure on a delta wing of low sweep angle exhibits
a number of distinctive characteristics, relative to the extensively
investigated case of a slender, highly swept delta wing. Emphasis in
the present investigation has been on crossflow planes, where vortex
breakdown and stall phenomena occur; these phenomena are known
to be important origins of unsteady buffet loading of the wing. The
primary features of the flow structure, and the potential for their
control, are summarized in the following:
1) The time-averaged flow structure shows a number of distinc-
tive  features  relative  to  the  structure  on  wings  of  relatively  high
sweep angle. Patterns of averaged velocity show a relatively narrow
elongated region of low velocity immediately adjacent to the sur-
face of the wing, which is bounded by a higher speed region. The
interface between these two domains of the velocity field represents
a region of high shear, and thereby the locus of unsteady events.
The corresponding streamline topology exhibits a saddle point that
is located outboard of the leading edge of the wing. At sufficiently
high angle of attack, the separation streamline from the leading edge
loses its identity. Patterns of averaged vorticity show an elongated
layer parallel to the surface of the wing at sufficiently low angle
of attack, a well-defined, dual-vortex substructure system is estab-
lished. The aforementioned patterns of vortical structures and stall
are expected to be a function of Reynolds number. Separation of the
shear layer from the leading edge will be influenced by the existence
of small-scale Kelvin?Helmholtz instabilities, of varying scale and
circulation,  as  the  Reynolds  number  is  altered.  Furthermore,  the
onset of stall from the surface of the wing can also be a function of
Reynolds number. These issues await further investigation.
2) Unsteadiness of the flow structure is represented by patterns of
rms velocity fluctuation wrms/U normal to the surface of the wing,
as well as Reynolds stress correlation v′w′/U2, both of which are
essentially coincident with maxima of the averaged vorticity ω
of the separated layer. Peak values of these fluctuation quantities
occur well inboard of the leading edge of the wing, and their peak
magnitudes continue to increase with increasing angle of attack up
to a moderately high value of α. Then, at sufficiently high angle
of attack, where substantial stall occurs, the peak value is actually
decreased.
3) The instantaneous structure of the flow is represented by pat-
terns of instantaneous vorticity, which take the form of well-defined
concentrations. At sufficiently low angle of attack, these individual
concentrations of vorticity retain their identity, whereas at moderate
and moderately high values of angle of attack, both smaller-scale
and larger-scale concentrations are evident. These patterns of in-
stantaneous  vorticity  concentrations  allow  physical  interpretation
of  the  spectral  content  of  the  unsteadiness.  Most  of  the  spectral
peaks along the separated vorticity layer are relatively broadband
and attain maximum amplitude well inboard of the leading edge.
When the averaged vorticity layer deflects toward the surface of the
wing near its plane of symmetry, the spectral peaks become small
or undetectable. At relatively low angle of attack, the same spec-
tral peak persists along the vorticity layer, whereas at moderate and
moderately high angle of attack, the predominant spectral peak is
successively lowered with increasing distance inboard of the leading
edge, where larger-scale clusters of vorticity are evident.
4) When the wing is subjected to small-amplitude perturbations,
substantial alterations of both the instantaneous and time-averaged
structure were observed. The most effective frequency of excitation
corresponds to the subharmonic of the broadband fluctuations in
the region of the shear layer closest to the leading edge, though this
criterion is not necessarily universal for other geometric and flow
parameters.
Acknowledgments
The authors are pleased to acknowledge support of the U.S. Air
Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR) under Grant F49620-
02-1-0061,  monitored  by  John  Schmisseur.  The  first  author  was
supported jointly by AFOSR and Cukurova University during his
research stay as a visiting scientist at Lehigh University. Prior to
and subsequent to his stay at Lehigh, he has been supported as a
research assistant at Cukurova University.
References
1Magness, C., Robinson, O., and Rockwell, D., “Instantaneous Topol-
ogy of the Unsteady Leading-Edge Vortex at High Angle of Attack,” AIAA
Journal, Vol. 31, No. 8, 1993, pp. 1384?1391.
2Visbal, M. R., and Gordnier, R. E., “Cross-Flow Topology of Vortical
Flows,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 32, No. 5, 1994, pp. 1085?1087.
3Riley, A. J., and Lowson, M. V., “Development of a Three-Dimensional
Free Shear Layer,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 369, 1998, pp. 49?89.
4Ol, M. V., and Gharib, M., “The Passage Toward Stall of Nonslender
Delta Wings at Low Reynolds Number,” AIAA Paper 2001-2843, 2001.
5Gursul, I., Taylor, G., and Wooding, C. L., “Vortex Flows over Fixed-
Wing Micro Air Vehicles,” AIAA Paper 02-0698, Jan. 2002.
6Payne, F. M., Ng, T. T., Nelson, R. C., and Schiff, L. B., “Visualization
and  Wake  Surveys  of  Vortical  Flow  over  a  Delta  Wing,”  AIAA  Journal,
Vol. 26, 1988, pp. 137?143.
7Lowson, M. V., “The Three Dimensional Vortex Sheet Structure on Delta
Wings,” AGARD, CP 438, Paper 11, 1988.
8Reynolds, G. A., and Abtahi, A. A., “Three-Dimensional Vortex Devel-
opment, Breakdown and Control,” AIAA Paper 89-0998, 1989.
9Washburn, A. E., and Visser, K. D., “Evolution of Vortical Structures in
the Shear Layer of Delta Wings,” AIAA Paper 94-2317, 1994.
10Mitchell, A., Molton, P., Barberis, D., and Delery, J., “Characterization
of  Vortex  Breakdown  by  Flow  Field  and  Surface  Measurements,”  AIAA
Paper 2000-0788, 2000.
11Visbal, M. R., and Gordnier, R. E., “On the Structure of the Shear Layer
Emanating from a Swept Leading Edge at Angle of Attack,” AIAA Paper
2003-4016, June 2003.
P1: ILT/GUB        P2: ILT
AIAA [aiaaj]        9:52    22 January 2004              March’2004 #10-J26594(A)/Yaniktepe
YANIKTEPE AND ROCKWELL                                                                                                              523
12Gordnier, R. E., and Visbal, M. R., “Higher-Order Compact Difference
Scheme Applied to the Simulation of a Low Sweep Delta Wing Flow,” AIAA
Paper 2003-0620, Jan. 2003.
13Gad-el-Hak, M., and Blackwelder, R. F., “The Discrete Vortices form a
Delta Wing,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 23, 1985, pp. 961, 962.
14Ozgoren, M., Sahin, B., and Rockwell, D., “Vortex Structure on a Delta
Wing at High Angle-of-Attack,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 40, No. 2, pp. 285?292.
15Winant, C. D., and Browand, F. K., “Vortex Pairing: The Mechanism of
Turbulent Mixing?Layer Growth at Moderate Reynolds Number,” Journal
of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 63, 1974, pp. 237?255.
16Gordnier, R., and Visbal, M. R., “Numerical Simulation of the Unsteady
Vortex Structure over a Delta Wing,” AIAA Paper 91-1811, 1991.
17Gordnier,  R.,  and  Visbal,  M.  R.,  “Unsteady  Vortex  Structure  over  a
Delta Wing,” Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 31, 1994, pp. 243?248.
18Gordnier, R. E., and Visbal, M. R., “Instabilities in the Shear Layer of
Delta Wings,” AIAA Paper 95-2281, 1995.
19Cipolla,  K.,  and  Rockwell,  D.,  “Small-Scale  Vortical  Structures  in
Crossflow Plane of a Rolling Delta Wing,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 36, No. 12,
1998, pp. 2276?2278.
20Garg,  A.  K.,  and  Leibovich,  S.,  “Spectral  Characteristics  of  Vortex
Breakdown Flowfields,” Physics of Fluids, Vol. 22, 1979, pp. 2053?2064.
21Gursul, I., “Unsteady Flow Phenomena over Delta Wings at High Angle
of Attack,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 32, No. 2, 1994, pp. 225?231.
22Menke, M., Yang, H., and Gursul, I., “Experiments on the Unsteady
Nature  of  Vortex  Breakdown  over  Delta  Wings,”  Experiments  in  Fluids,
Vol. 27, 1999, pp. 262?272.
23Gad-el-Hak, M., and Blackwelder, R. F., “Control of the Discrete Vor-
tices from a Delta Wing,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 25, 1986, pp. 1042?1049.
24Ozgoren, M., Sahin, B., and Rockwell, D., “Perturbations of a Delta
Wing: Control of Vortex Breakdown and Buffeting,” Journal of Aircraft,
Vol. 38, No. 6, 2001, pp. 1040?1050.
25Akilli, H., and Rockwell, D., “Vortex Formation from a Cylinder in
Shallow Water,” Physics of Fluids, Vol. 14, No. 9, 2002, pp. 2957?2967.
R. Lucht
Associate Editor
View publication stats
View publication stats
