Aerospace Science and Technology 86 (2019) 327?340
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Aerospace  Science  and  Technology
www.elsevier.com/locate/aescte
Effect  of  acicular  vortex  generators  on  the  aerodynamic  features  of 
a slender  delta  wing
Omid Nematollahia, Mahdi Nili-Ahmadabadib, Hyunduk Seoa, Kyung Chun Kima,?
a School of Mechanical Engineering, Pusan National University, Busan 609-735, Republic of Korea
b Department of Mechanical Engineering, Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan 84156-83111, Iran
a r t i c l e     i n f o                        a b s t r a c t
Article history:
Received 27 September 2018
Received in revised form 30 November 2018
Accepted 2 January 2019
Available online 16 January 2019
Keywords:
Delta wing
Vortex breakdown
Aerodynamic performance
Needle vortex generator
Particle image velocimetry
Leading-edge vortices
This study investigates the flow structures and aerodynamic performance of a slender delta wing that has 
a sweep angle of 65 degrees and is equipped with acicular vortex generators. The results were compared 
with those of a smooth wing. Particle image velocimetry (PIV) was used to visualize the flow at six 
different sections of the delta wing in both the chord-wise and span-wise directions at an angle of attack 
(AOA) of 30 degrees and a Reynolds number of Re = 2.4 ×105. The effect of the acicular vortex generators 
on the vortex diameters, locations of vortex breakdown, linear convolution integral patterns, circulation, 
and separation were studied. The Q -criterion was used for vortex boundaries for the span-wise sections. 
The results show the acicular vortex generators have positive effects on the aerodynamic performance 
of the wing. Furthermore, the acicular wing delays the vortex breakdown in comparison with a smooth 
wing and increases the flow momentum near the upper wing surface and behind the wing.
c2019 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The concept of wing maneuverability at a high angle of attack 
(AOA)  of  has  been  the  topic  of  much  research  on  aerodynamics 
[1]. The special geometry configuration of delta wings leads to a 
pair of spiral vortices [2]. The axial velocity is increased by two 
or three times the free stream velocity in the presence of these 
vortices [4]. Furthermore, the vortex diameter can grow by 30% of 
the local span [3]. The low-pressure areas formed by the vortices 
increases the lift force, which is called vortex lift [4]. This higher 
lift improves the maneuverability at a higher angle of attack (AOA) 
in  comparison  with  typical  wings  [5,6].  The  flow  structures  and 
aerodynamic parameters of the delta wing configuration are well 
known [7?9].
The  flow  structure  above  a  delta  wing  depends  on  the  lead-
ing edge geometry, wing thickness, AOA, free-stream situation, and 
Reynolds number [10]. However, at high AOA, the leading edge vor-
tices are the main vortices, they are the most dominant phenom-
ena, and they are independent of the Reynolds number. However, 
the secondary vortices are highly dependent on the Reynolds num-
ber [11]. Fig. 1 shows a diagram of leading-edge vortices over a 
delta wing.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: kckim@pusan.ac.kr (K.C. Kim).
Fig. 1. Flow structure and leading-edge vortices over a delta wing [12].
With increasing AOA, the leading edge vortices are disturbed, 
which is called vortex breakdown [13?16]. This breakdown is con-
nected  with  the  axial  velocity  stagnation  inside  the  vortex  core 
and the distortion of vortical structures. These phenomena have a 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ast.2019.01.002
1270-9638/c2019 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.
328                                             O. Nematollahi et al. / Aerospace Science and Technology 86 (2019) 327?340
Nomenclature
A                 area of vortex region
AOA            angle of attack
c                  wing chord
dv               vortex diameter
h                 height
l                   length of delta wing leading edge
Q                criterion of vortex region
S                 strain rate
s                  wing span
t                  time
U                 velocity
x                  distance from the apex
y                 height from delta wing trailing edge
Γ            circulation
Ω            vorticity
α           angle of attack
Subscripts
∞         free stream
negative effect on the lift and pitching moment [17]. Vortex break-
down has the following characteristics:
? Rapid slowing down of the vortex core in the chord-wise di-
rection
? The rapid increase in the vortex diameter
? Reverse flow region
? Vortical flow changes to a turbulent wake-like region [11].
The breakdown makes the downstream flow unstable [17]. Fur-
thermore, breakdown prevents the decrease of the section pressure 
downstream after breakdown, which leads to the lift decreasing. 
Therefore, preventing or postponing the vortex breakdown will im-
prove  the  lift.  Many  studies  have  been  conducted  to  investigate 
the  flow  around  a  delta  wing  to  increase  the  lift,  delay  vortex 
breakdown, and reduce drag. For example, Ol and Gharib [18] used 
particle image velocimetry (PIV) to study the velocity distribution 
in the vicinity of the trailing edge. They showed that the secondary 
vortices are not strong at small Reynolds numbers. Lu and Zhu [19]
investigated the possible configurations of vortex breakdown over 
a delta wing. They found that besides the well-known bubble and 
spiral configurations, there are also three different structures called 
double spiral, filiform spiral, and frog jump structures.
Taylor and Gursul [20] studied the unstable vortical flow over 
delta wings. They concluded that vortex breakdown is delayed at 
low Reynolds numbers. Recently, Traub [21] investigated the effect 
of a pusher propeller over a delta wing. They showed that using 
the propeller results in large moment excursions. Qine et al. [22]
considered the ground effects on the flow structure over a delta 
wing. The results showed that the flow below the wing stagnates 
when the ground effect occurs. In other works, they also consid-
ered  the  effect  of  static  ground  on  the  aerodynamic  forces  and 
flow structure over a delta wing by using Delayed Detached-Eddy 
Simulation  (DDES).  They  showed  that  the  lift  and  drag  increase 
nonlinearly with decreasing height.
Hadidoolabi and Ansarian [23] experimentally studied a pitch-
ing delta wing using pressure measurements and numerical simu-
lations. They concluded that increasing the AOA produces stronger 
vortices  in  the  supersonic  regime.  Schutte  and  Ludeke  [24] nu-
merically investigated the flow over a 65-degree delta wing with 
a  rounded  leading  edge.  They  showed  that  a  small  increase  of 
the AOA results in the inner and outer vortices moving upstream. 
A simulation was also done to evaluate the aerodynamic features 
of a delta wing with a rounded leading edge using Detached Eddy 
Simulation (DES) [25]. The flow structure was obtained in reason-
able detail by using Reynolds-averaged Navier?Stokes (RANS) tur-
bulence models. However, the Spalart?Allmaras Delayed Detached-
Eddy Simulation (SA-DDES) model gave a better understanding of 
the flow field.
Fritz [26] simulated the flow structure over a special delta wing 
with  a  rounded  leading  edge  at  subsonic  speed.  In  the  numeri-
cal simulation, the vortex breakdown happened at a lower AOA in 
comparison with experiments due to under-prediction of the axial 
flow velocity in the vortex core. Gursul et al. [27] evaluated the op-
portunities for integration of experimental and numerical methods 
for the investigation of delta wing flows. They concluded that com-
putational  fluid  dynamics  can  be  very  valuable  to  guide  choices 
about the types and locations used for experimental data collec-
tion.
There have been many methods for reducing drag on airplanes, 
including  flaps  [28],  changing  the  sweep  angle  [29],  creating  a 
round edge [30], vortex generators [31], flexible wings [32], fins 
[33], and riblets [34]. Passive vortex generators have been used for 
a  long  time  to  control  the  flow  separation  by  transferring  free-
stream  momentum  to  the  near-wall  momentum  [35].  Taylor  in-
troduced the conventional vane-type vortex generator [36]. There 
have been a number of studies concerning the different effects of 
vortex generators for aircraft applications to postpone the separa-
tion [37], enhance lift [38], and reduce drag [39].
Vortex  generators  have  been  used  in  aircraft [40],  wind  tur-
bines [41], and the automotive industry [42]. A number of studies 
have also used vortex generators in delta wings. Ashill et al. in-
vestigated the effects of a miniature wire segment as a low-profile 
vortex generator over a delta wing model with a free-stream Mach 
number  of  0.18  and  Reynolds  number  of  4 × 106  [43?46].  They 
found a maximum drag reduction of about one-half. Langan and 
Samuels [47] studied the effect of vortex generators over diamond 
wings with a Reynolds number of 4 × 106. They reported a maxi-
mum lift-to-dragmax of 6% for the best configuration for co-rotating 
vane vortex generators. Rao and Campbell [48] investigated the ef-
fect of pylon vortex generators for a delta wing with a sweep angle 
of 60 degrees. They found that this vortex generator can be an ef-
fective device for tailoring the longitudinal characteristics of delta 
wings.
To  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  there  has  been  no  study  on 
the application of acicular type vortex generators on delta wings. 
Therefore, the current study investigates the effects of acicular vor-
tex generators on controlling the leading-edge vortices using PIV 
measurements. Different features were studied, such as the vortex 
diameter, location of vortex breakdown, linear integral convolution 
(LIC) patterns, circulation, and separation.
2. Experimental setup and model specifications
Experiments  were  done  in  a  horizontal  wind  tunnel,  which 
has a 30 by 30-cm2 rectangular test section with an air speed of 
30 m/s that is produced by a centrifugal blower. The average tur-
bulence intensity of the wind tunnel is less than 0.4%. The wind 
tunnel consists of an air blower, a motor, an inverter to change the 
flow velocity, an air inlet duct, a three-mesh screen, and a hon-
eycomb mesh to create a uniform air flow. An inverter was used 
to  change  the  free-stream  flow  velocity.  Flow  tests  were  carried 
O. Nematollahi et al. / Aerospace Science and Technology 86 (2019) 327?340                                                                                                  329
Fig. 2. Delta wing models configuration with schematic view (all the dimensions are in mm).
out on both smooth models and acicular models with needle-type 
vortex generators. Both delta wings have the same chord length 
of 15 cm and a sweep angle of 65 degrees, as shown in Fig. 2. 
Furthermore, because of vortex generators span length has a dif-
ference  of  4.26  mm  for  delta  wings.  A  sharp  chamfer  with  an 
angle of 45 degrees was applied to the leading edges of the mod-
els.  The  maximum  blockage  ratio  for  both  delta  wing  models  is 
5.83%.
A 2D-PIV system was used to observe the flow structure. The 
flow was visualized at 6 cross-sectional planes with similar dis-
tances from each other that are perpendicular to the wing’s suction 
surface and parallel to the wing span, as well as 6 axial section 
planes  with  similar  distances  from  each  other  that  are  perpen-
dicular  to  the  wing’s  suction  surface,  as  shown  in  Fig. 3.  The 
configuration of the laser and the camera are also shown in the 
figure. The PIV parameters during the experiments were kept con-
stant.
The PIV system includes a PIVCAM 10-15 CCD camera, a double-
pulsed Nd-Yag laser with a maximum power of 200 mJ/pulse, a 
TSI 610032 synchronizer, and a computer. The camera captures the 
image  with  a  pixel  resolution  of  1280  by  1024  pixels.  Olive  oil 
droplets were used as tracer particles. Olive oil satisfies the gen-
eral requirements for PIV seeding particles of being non-corrosive, 
non-toxic, chemically non-volatile, and non-abrasive. Furthermore, 
droplets of olive oil have diameters of around 1?2 μm and have 
an  acceptable  aerodynamic  reaction  to  the  velocity  field  in  the 
flow. Two Laskin nozzle chambers with six nozzles were used to 
generate  particles.  A  high-pressure  air  supplier  was  used  at  the 
chamber inlet to generate even spreading of the compressed air to 
each nozzle.
The time difference between two consecutive images for cap-
turing a suitable flow image near the model changes from 10 μs to 
100 μs while the frequency of laser pulse was 2 Hz indicating the 
time difference between each double pulses. The resolution of PIV 
measurement is as before mentioned as 1280 by 1024 pixels. An 
80 to 200-mm Nikon lens was used to have a field of view (FOV) 
of 110 mm by 110 mm. The size of the interrogation window for 
the velocity calculation was 32 × 32 pixels, and 50% overlap was 
allowed. PIVLab software was used for PIV processing, including re-
moving false vectors, ensemble averaging, and additional statistical 
calculations [49].
3. Results and discussion
The  flow  structure  on  delta  wings  is  completely  transient. 
This  section  discusses  the  average  results,  so  it  is  necessary  to 
prove that enough images are being considered for averaging. In 
other  words,  the  independency  of  the  velocity  contours  should 
be proven. Therefore, the velocity at one of the cross sections is 
shown in Fig. 4 for different numbers of instantaneous images for 
a smooth delta wing.
The flow structure appears to be almost the same, but it should 
be proven with a more detailed comparison. Fig. 5 shows a com-
parison of the mean velocity magnitude in the span-wise direction 
over  the  wing  surface  for  four  different  numbers  of  images.  As 
seen, the difference between 100 images and 200 images is less 
than 10 percent. Furthermore, a recently published work by Muir 
et al. [50] utilized 100 image (which means 50 pair of frames) or 
by Lee and Ko [51] which they have used 60 images. Therefore, 
using  200  images  (100  pair  of  images)  in  averaging  process  are 
enough to capture the flow structures over the delta wings.
The mean velocity and vorticity contours are shown in Figs. 6
and 7 for each cross section. The vortex pair is almost symmet-
rical,  so  only  one  of  them  is  shown.  Two  primary  vortices  are 
produced at the leading edge and move across the wing surface 
from the apex. After the apex, the primary vortices are strength-
ened when vorticity is added along the leading edge. The vortices 
are  then  dissipated  by  secondary  vortices,  viscosity  effects,  and 
330                                             O. Nematollahi et al. / Aerospace Science and Technology 86 (2019) 327?340
Fig. 2. (continued)
O. Nematollahi et al. / Aerospace Science and Technology 86 (2019) 327?340                                                                                                  331
Fig. 3. PIV setup and test sections.
Fig. 4. Mean velocity averages for different numbers of images. (For interpretation of 
the colors in the figure(s), the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
vortex breakdown. Leading-edge vortices are formed from the first 
section until the last section. The two main structures are shown 
in Fig. 6 in red and blue. Blue represents the vortex core, while red 
represents the feeding by the leading edge.
Fig. 5. Mean velocity magnitude over the wing surface in the span-wise direction.
As shown in Fig. 7, there are two nearly symmetrical vortices 
in each section with opposite directions. These two large vortices 
are the main vortices. The small green area trapped between the 
main vortices and the wing surface near the wing corners is the 
secondary  vortex,  which  has  the  opposite  direction  of  the  main 
vortex. Also, in Fig. 7, the vortex diameters on the smooth model 
are larger than those on the acicular model.
A  quantitative  criterion  should  be  considered  to  obtain  more 
details about the vortex boundaries. Hunt et al. [52] introduced the 
Q -criterion to specify the vortex boundary. In this criterion, a vor-
tex is a connected region where Q   is positive, which is expressed 
as follows:
Q  =
1
2
|Ω|2 ? |S|2 > 0                                  (1)
where S  and Ω  are the strain rate and vorticity, respectively. The 
vortex region is where the magnitude of the vorticity overcomes 
the  magnitude  of  the  strain-rate.  The  pressure  inside  the  vortex 
needs to be lower than the pressure at infinity [52,53].
Fig. 8 shows the Q   criterion contours for each cross section for 
both wings. The colored regions are vortex structures except for 
the blue parts, which are non-vortex regions. The vortex diameter 
is defined by as follows:
dv  = 4(
A
2 )
π                                                                      (2)
where  A   is  the  region  of  positive  Q   (the  vortex  region),  which 
encompasses both vortices. The vortex diameter for each section is 
shown in Fig. 9.
The smooth wing generally has larger vortex diameters. As ex-
pected, the vortex diameter increases from the apex to the trailing 
edge  due  to  increasing  leading-edge  feeding  and  vortex  break-
down  at  the  final  sections.  The  probability  of  vortex  breakdown 
increases with increasing AOA. The prediction of the exact loca-
tion  of  the  breakdown  is  a  challenging  aspect  of  the  flow  over 
the delta wings, but it is characterized by the destruction of the 
leading  edge  vortex.  In  a  preliminary  inspection  of  the  onset  of 
the vortex breakdown, the vortices on the smooth wing were not 
coherent, while on the acicular wing, the vortices were almost co-
herent. The incoherent vortices occur at section 4 for the acicular 
wing. This means that the vortex breakdown is delayed by almost 
one  section.  This  phenomenon  affects  the  aerodynamic  features, 
maneuverability, and stability of aircraft.
332                                             O. Nematollahi et al. / Aerospace Science and Technology 86 (2019) 327?340
Fig. 6. Mean velocity contours at cross sections.
Identifying the breakdown location is very complicated due to 
the oscillation of the location. To show the detail of the instan-
taneous  flow  structure  over  the  delta  wings,  the  linear  integral 
convolution (LIC) has been utilized for both wings. LIC is a visu-
alization  technique  to  show  the  vector  field  in  detail  which  has 
been proposed by Cabral and Leedom [54]. LICs convey the vec-
tor field orientation and the output of LIC vector is high density 
streamlines  plot  that  present  all  the  in  plane  features  of  vector 
field [55]. The LIC contours are shown for both wings in section 3, 
which  is  the  location  of  the  vortex-breakdown  onset  are  shown 
in Fig. 10. A qualitative criterion was studied based on the vor-
tex  core  configuration.  The  vortex  breakdown  started  whenever 
the vortex core was divided into two or more vortices or when-
ever  the  vortices  are  unstable  that  eventually  cancel  each  other 
out. The flow structure for nine consecutively steps are compared 
for both models. The vortex over the acicular model is more sta-
ble  and  almost  has  one  main  core,  while  in  the  smooth  model, 
the main vortex is divided by two vortices, and the vortices are 
unstable.  Furthermore,  as  it  can  be  seen  in  the  acicular  wing 
the vortices core are more coherent. These conditions qualitatively 
prove that the vortex breakdown has started for the smooth model 
but  not  the  acicular  model.  Although,  the  acicular  vortex  gener-
ator  effect  is  not  much  comparable  here,  but  as  it  can  be  seen 
the  vortex  structures  for  the  acicular  wing  is  a  little  more  sta-
ble.  Furthermore,  to  have  a  more  comprehensive  understanding 
of flow structure two video files of LIC contours for both wings 
for all the frame have been implemented as supplementary mate-
rial.
A quantitative criterion is needed to clarify the exact position 
of the vortex breakdown. As mentioned, in the vortex breakdown 
O. Nematollahi et al. / Aerospace Science and Technology 86 (2019) 327?340                                                                                                  333
Fig. 7. Vorticity contours at each cross section (1/s).
phenomena, the main vortex is divided into two or more vortices 
in opposite directions, which are bounded by a larger area. This 
means that the vorticity integral over the area of the divided vor-
tex core will decrease. Therefore, the circulation Γ  can be used as 
a quantitative parameter for the position of the vortex breakdown. 
The circulation is the integral vorticity over an area and is defined 
by Eq. (3):
Γ = ?
S
Ω.dS                                                                                                 (3)
where Ω  is the vorticity, and S  is the area of the vorticity region. 
To calculate the circulation, it is very important to define the cor-
rect area. As mentioned, the vortex boundaries are defined by the 
Q -criterion. Therefore, this criterion was used to specify the vor-
tex boundaries. Fig. 11 shows an example of the calculation of the 
vortices for the smooth wing at section 6. The area with a positive 
value of the Q-criterion is in the vortex area. To measure the ex-
act area of the vortex, this criterion is used for integrating the area 
shown in Fig. 12-a.
Two symmetric vortices in each section neutralize each other, 
so the overall circulation for the whole domain is zero. However, 
to have a robust measurement of the circulation, the average of 
both vortex circulations is used, as shown in Eq. (4):
Γaverage  = Γright  + |Γleft|
2                                        (4)
The  distributions  of  the  circulation  for  both  wings  are  shown 
in  Fig. 13.  The  acicular  wings  have  lower  circulation  than  the 
smooth  model.  This  means  that  using  the  sharp  vortex  gen-
erators  changes  the  velocity  in  the  span-wise  direction  to  the 
chord-wise  direction  and  then  decreases  the  circulation.  The 
vortex  generators  have  been  used  to  re-energize  the  boundary 
layer  in  the  chord-wise  direction.  This  direction  change  leads 
to  vortex  lift  at  the  leading  edge.  Furthermore,  it  should  be 
noted that using acicular vortex generator create chord wise vor-
tices  which  means  that  the  velocity  direction  will  be  changed 
from  span  wise  to  chord  wise  as  it  will  be  shown  in  the  ax-
ial  section  in  detail.  Therefore,  this  changing  cause  that  circu-
lation  in  span  decrease  in  comparison  with  smooth  wings.  In 
other words, considering that leading edge vortices moves along 
a  helix  then  by  using  acicular  vortex  generator  the  increase 
the  helix  pitch.  This  effect  decrease  the  circulation  in  acicu-
lar  wing.  This  phenomenon can  be  proved  by  the  velocity  dis-
tribution  in  chord  wise  direction  which  will  be  presented  in 
Fig. 19.
After vortex breakdown, the vortices are incoherent. The Q -cri-
terion was used to prove qualitatively and quantitatively that vor-
tex  breakdown  occurs  at  sections 3  and  4  for  the  smooth  and 
acicular  delta  wings,  respectively.  As  it  can  be  seen  there  is  a 
section which slop of circulation changes alongside the chord in 
Fig. 13. This slope changing occur in sections 3 and 4 for smooth 
and acicular wings, respectively. In other words, the concavity of 
each graph shows the location of the vortex breakdown. This de-
334                                             O. Nematollahi et al. / Aerospace Science and Technology 86 (2019) 327?340
Fig. 8. Vortex region identification using the Q   criterion.
crease  is  seen  in  section 4  for  the  acicular  wing.  This  criterion 
is  considered  to  find  the  vortex  breakdown  location  has  good 
agreement with the  Q -criterion contours. However, the exact lo-
cation  has  a  tolerance  of  1 cm  due  to  each  sequential  section 
distance.
Fig. 14 shows the circulation increase for each section. For the 
smooth wing, a sudden decrease in the rate happens between sec-
tions 2 and 3, while for the acicular wing, the sudden drop in the 
rate of increase of the circulation happens between sections 3 and 
4. This again shows that the vortex breakdown is postponed by 
one section when using the acicular wing.
Fig. 15 shows  the  velocity  magnitude  for  all  chord-wise  sec-
tions. Qualitatively, the velocity magnitude is higher for the acicu-
lar model in the vicinity of the wing surface for the acicular wing 
than the smooth one. This means that the vortex generators on 
the acicular wing work well. In other words, the vortex generators 
cause the upper flow with higher velocity stick to the surface, as 
well as increase the near surface momentum lift and reduce the 
drag. For section A, which is the symmetry section, the flow struc-
ture is almost the same, but the velocity is different. Furthermore, 
there is no leading-edge vortex in this section.
Section B is where the onset of the leading edge vortices oc-
curs. Vortices are created, but they are very small. In this section, 
the higher velocity near the surface can also be seen again. In the 
case of the drag forces, In addition as can be seen velocity behind 
the acicular wing is higher than the smooth one, which proves that 
flow momentum is increased in behind of the wing the pressure 
drag force are reduced. In addition, using a qualitative visualization 
Fig. 9. Vortex diameter for each section.
inspection it can be seen that the wake area is reduced in acic-
ular wing. Furthermore, as a quantitative comparison the velocity 
behind the wings are shown in Fig. 16 which proves the higher ve-
locity in acicular wing. From sections C to F, leading-edge vortices 
are developing and growing in size. Besides the higher velocity on 
the acicular wing, the lower wake region leads to lower drag force. 
O. Nematollahi et al. / Aerospace Science and Technology 86 (2019) 327?340                                                                                                  335
Fig. 10. Vortex structures of the wings using LIC contours.
Fig. 11. Contour of Q -criterion at the first section of the smooth wing.
Comparing sections B and C with sections D to F shows that the 
leading-edge vortices have more effects on the flow structure near 
the leading edge.
As it can be seen there are a couple of regions with high or 
low velocity in Fig. 15. The low velocity region in section A shows 
the stream velocity while high velocity region shows high shear 
layer velocity near the wing surface. In other sections in the vor-
tices area the velocity is significantly decreased which illustrated 
as blue. The existence of vortices before breakdown led to increase 
the  velocity  near  the  upper  surface.  The  area  between  the  low 
velocity vortex core regions and high velocity free stream that is 
shear stress layer around the vortex core in green color.
The u-velocity contours for all sections are compared in Fig. 17. 
The u-velocity in all sections is higher for the acicular model be-
cause of the vortex generators using a qualitative inspection which 
also shown quantitatively in Figs. 19 and 20 for near wing surface 
and behind of the wing, respectively. As expected, the vortex gen-
erators  bring  the  free-stream  momentum  to  the  boundary  layer 
and  increase  u  component  of  the  velocity  profile.  The  negative 
u-velocity shows the existence of a reverse flow, highly unstable 
vortices, and vortex breakdown. Since there are many regions with 
negative  u-velocity,  it  can  be  concluded  that  the  flow  over  the 
smooth wing is more unstable and has a high possibility of vor-
tex breakdown.
336                                             O. Nematollahi et al. / Aerospace Science and Technology 86 (2019) 327?340
Fig. 12. Vortex area definition.
Fig. 13. Distribution of the vortex circulation for both wings.
Fig. 14. Distribution of the rate of increase of the circulation for both wings.
In this figure, the red and yellow regions near the wing surfaces 
are the high velocity region and high shear regions. While in the 
section C to F the green regions are the boundary regions of vor-
tices. The blue regions with low to lowest velocity are vortex core 
and reverse flow indicating the broken vortex core.
Fig. 18 shows the mean velocity and related u-component for 
section C for sections in the axial direction. As expected, the veloc-
ity profiles for both the magnitude and u-velocity have increased 
for the acicular model. The vortex generators change the boundary 
layer thickness and bring higher energy from the upper flow to the 
surface. Therefore, it causes the velocity near the wing surface to 
increase. The momentum of the flow in the chord-wise direction 
was increased by using vortex generators. This effect leads to a re-
duction in the wake area and drag force. This chord-wise increase 
causes the vortex streamlines to the follow chord-wise direction. 
Therefore, the pitch of the spiral streamlines increased, which is 
led  to  a  higher  flow  momentum  near  the  surface  lift  force.  The 
angle of the vortex cone is reduced on the acicular wing, which 
shows that the vortex diameter decreases with the acicular wing. 
In  addition  as  seen  in  the  u-velocity  contours,  the  reverse  flow 
regions (blue colors) which have negative velocity in the smooth 
wing is higher than that acicular wing. This phenomena leads to 
an unstable flow in smooth wing which ultimately increases the 
possibility of vortex breakdown.
To investigate the effect of vortex generators quantitatively on 
flow  structure,  Fig. 19 shows  the  U-velocity  of  the  flow  in  the 
vicinity of the wing surface which means almost 2 mm from wing 
surface  for  all  sections.  This  distance  is  chosen  to  make  a  clear 
comparison between both wings in a same position for flow struc-
ture and aerodynamic performance. This figure shows the previous 
claims  about  the  increasing  velocity  on  the  wing  with  the  vor-
tex  generators.  However,  the  difference  between  the  u-velocities 
in section A is lower than in sections B to D, which means that 
the vortex generators have a lower effect in this area. This figure 
shows  that  the  momentum  in  the  chord-wise  direction  has  in-
creased over the chord line except near the apex and leading edge 
for each section. However, vortex generators decrease the veloc-
ity at the apex and leading edge, but the free stream sticks to the 
boundary layer, and then the momentum increases until the trail-
ing edge. Furthermore, since the secondary vortices near section F 
and after it becomes stronger, the velocity distribution changes in 
this section.
The u-velocity distribution in behind of the wings at the ax-
ial locations (refer to Fig. 3) is shown in Fig. 20. Each line starts 
from 2 mm from wing surface until reaching to free stream veloc-
ity. Again, the distribution in section A is almost the same. Which 
means this symmetry section is not affected by the vortex genera-
tors, which have a lower effect in this area. The effect of the vortex 
generators in sections B to E leads to a much higher edge core. 
Furthermore, a low-speed region can be seen clearly in all sections 
except section A. This low-speed region is the vortex core, and on 
both sides, the wing surface velocity and free stream velocity are 
high. This higher velocity near the surface shows a drag reduction 
on the acicular wing, which again is in agreement with the pre-
vious section. The higher velocity for the acicular wing leads to a 
O. Nematollahi et al. / Aerospace Science and Technology 86 (2019) 327?340                                                                                                  337
Fig. 15. Mean velocity and contours at each section.
stronger vortex and decrease in the vortex cone angle, which re-
sults in higher momentum behind the wing lift.
In  general  it  should  be  mentioned  that  using  acicular  vortex 
generator  increase  the  flow  momentum  in  the  upper  surface  of 
wing which can lead to increasing lift and decreeing drag forces. 
In addition, this vortex generator enlarge the momentum in be-
hind of the wing that may reduce the drag. However, the quan-
titative result is subordinate to force measurements in the future 
works.
4. Conclusion
This study investigated the effect of acicular vortex generators 
on the aerodynamic features of slender delta wings in a horizontal 
wind tunnel. A 2D-PIV method was used to visualize the qualita-
tive velocity field. Six sections in both the span-wise and chord-
wise directions were studied. The flow structures were highly un-
stable over the delta wing, and the velocity field was gained by 
averaging 100 instantaneous velocity contours which prepared by 
100 pairs of images. The results showed a positive effect of using 
the acicular vortex generators on the aerodynamic performance of 
the delta wing. The Q-criterion was applied for the vortex bound-
ary definition.
The  results  showed  that  using  the  acicular  vortex  generators 
delay the breakdown of the leading-edge vortex for one section. 
Furthermore, using this type of vortex generator can increase the 
flow momentum near upper surface and behind the wing which 
may lead to lift increment and drag decrement. The circulation was 
used as a criterion for the definition of the location of the vortex 
breakdown. The PIV measurements showed that when the vortex 
on the delta wing broke down, the vortex core divided into more 
vortices with opposite directions, and the rate of increase of the 
circulation along the flow direction suddenly decreased after the 
section where the vortex breakdown occurred. Moreover, the acic-
ular vortex generators increased the momentum in the vicinity of 
the wing surface and behind the wing.
338                                             O. Nematollahi et al. / Aerospace Science and Technology 86 (2019) 327?340
Fig. 16. Mean velocity at behind of wings.
Fig. 17. U-velocity and contours at each section.
O. Nematollahi et al. / Aerospace Science and Technology 86 (2019) 327?340                                                                                                  339
Fig. 18. Mean velocity and related u-component contours at section C.
Fig. 19. U-velocity distribution along the lines parallel to the chord.
Fig. 20. U-velocity distribution behind the wings.
340                                             O. Nematollahi et al. / Aerospace Science and Technology 86 (2019) 327?340
Conflict of interest statement
There is no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation 
of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (MSIT) (No. 
2011-0030013, No. 2018R1A2B2007117).
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary material related to this article can be found on-
line at https://doi.org /10.1016/j .ast.2019 .01.002.
References
[1] B.-g. Mi, H. Zhan, S.-s. Lu, An extended unsteady aerodynamic model at high 
angles of attack, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 77 (2018) 788?801.
[2] D. Hummel, On the vortex formation over a slender wing at large angles of 
attack, in: High Angle of Attack Aerodynamics, AGARD, 1978, pp. 15-11?15-17.
[3] R.C. Nelson, A. Pelletier, The unsteady aerodynamics of slender wings and 
aircraft undergoing large amplitude maneuvers, Prog. Aerosp. Sci. 39 (2003) 
185?248.
[4] J.M. Luckring, A survey of factors affecting blunt leading-edge separation for 
swept and semi-slender wings, in: 28th Applied Aerodynamics Conference, 
AIAA, 2010, p. 2010.
[5] I. Heron, R.Y. Myose, Impingement of a von Karman vortex street on a delta 
wing, J. Aircr. 42 (2005) 1084.
[6] M. Lee, C.-M. Ho, Vortex dynamics of delta wings, in: Frontiers in Experimental 
Fluid Mechanics, Springer, 1989, pp. 365?427.
[7] C. Breitsamter, Experimental studies of the turbulent flow structure of leading-
edge vortices, in: Notes on Numerical Fluid Mechanics, vol. 60, 1997, pp. 79?86.
[8] A. Furman, C. Breitsamter, Turbulent and unsteady flow characteristics of delta 
wing vortex systems, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 24 (2013) 32?44.
[9] I. Gursul, Unsteady flow phenomena over delta wings at high angle of attack, 
AIAA J. 32 (1994) 225?231.
[10] B. Yaniktepe, Origin and Control of Vortex Breakdown of Unmanned Combat 
Air Vehicles, Ph.D. thesis, Univ. of Cukurova, Balcali, Turkey, 2006.
[11] C. Munro, P. Krus, C. Jouannet, Implications of scale effect for the prediction of 
high angle of attack aerodynamics, Prog. Aerosp. Sci. 41 (2005) 301?322.
[12] I. Gursul, Z. Wang, E. Vardaki, Review of flow control mechanisms of leading-
edge vortices, Prog. Aerosp. Sci. 43 (2007) 246?270.
[13] J. Kegelman, F. Roos, The flowfields of bursting vortices over moderately swept 
delta wings, in: 28th Aerospace Sciences Meeting, 1990, p. 599.
[14] J. Kegelman, F. Roos, Effects of leading-edge shape and vortex burst on the 
flowfield of a 70-degree-sweep delta-wing, in: 27th Aerospace Sciences Meet-
ing, 1989, p. 86.
[15] N. Lambourne, The bursting of leading-edge vortices ? some observations and 
discussion of the phenomenon, ARCR & M 3282, 1962, pp. 1?36.
[16] L.W. Traub, Simple prediction method for location of vortex breakdown on 
delta wings, J. Aircr. 33 (1996) 452?454.
[17] N.G. Verhaagen, C. VanBossuyt, Flow on a 65-deg blunt apex, in: 24th Applied 
Aerodynamics Conference, San Francisco, California, 2006.
[18] M. Ol, M. Gharib, The passage toward stall of nonslender delta wings at low 
Reynolds number, in: 31st AIAA Fluid Dynamics Conference and Exhibit, 2001, 
pp. 11?14, AIAA Paper 2001-2843.
[19] Z.-Y. Lu, L.-G. Zhu, Study on forms of vortex breakdown over delta wing, Chin. 
J. Aeronaut. 17 (2004) 13?16.
[20] G.S. Taylor, I. Gursul, Buffeting flows over a low-sweep delta wing, AIAA J. 42 
(2004) 1737?1745.
[21] L.W. Traub, Effect of a pusher propeller on a delta wing, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 
48 (2016) 115?121.
[22] Y. Qin, P. Liu, Q. Qu, H. Guo, Numerical study of aerodynamic forces and flow 
physics of a delta wing in dynamic ground effect, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 51 
(2016) 203?221.
[23] M. Hadidoolabi, H. Ansarian, Supersonic flow over a pitching delta wing using 
surface pressure measurements and numerical simulations, Chin. J. Aeronaut. 
31 (2018) 65?78.
[24] A.  Schutte,  H.  Ludeke,  Numerical  investigations  on  the  VFE-2  65-degree 
rounded  leading  edge  delta  wing  using  the  unstructured  DLR  TAU-code, 
Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 24 (2013) 56?65.
[25] R.M. Cummings, A. Schutte, Detached-eddy simulation of the vortical flow field 
about the VFE-2 delta wing, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 24 (2013) 66?76.
[26] W. Fritz, Numerical simulation of the peculiar subsonic flow-field about the 
VFE-2 delta wing with rounded leading edge, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 24 (2013) 
45?55.
[27] I. Gursul, M.R. Allan, K.J. Badcock, Opportunities for the integrated use of mea-
surements and computations for the understanding of delta wing aerodynam-
ics, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 9 (2005) 181?189.
[28] E. Canepa, D. Lengani, F. Satta, E. Spano, M. Ubaldi, P. Zunino, Boundary layer 
separation control on a flat plate with adverse pressure gradients using vortex 
generators, in: Proc. ASME Turbo Expo, 2006.
[29] P. Earnshaw, J. Lawford, Low-Speed Wind-Tunnel Experiments on a Series of 
Sharp-Edged Delta Wings, HM Stationery Office, 1966.
[30] M. Kyriakou, D. Missirlis, K. Yakinthos, Numerical modeling of the vortex break-
down phenomenon on a delta wing with trailing-edge jet-flap, Int. J. Heat Fluid 
Flow 31 (2010) 1087?1095.
[31] L. Zhang, K. Yang, J. Xu, M. Zhang, Modeling of delta-wing type vortex genera-
tors, Sci. China, Technol. Sci. 54 (2011) 277?285.
[32] I. Gursul, R. Gordnier, M. Visbal, Unsteady aerodynamics of nonslender delta 
wings, Prog. Aerosp. Sci. 41 (2005) 515?557.
[33] X. Meng, F. Liu, S. Luo, Effect of low dorsal fin on the breakdown of vortices 
over a slender delta wing, Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 81 (2018) 316?321.
[34] S.-J. Lee, Y.-G. Jang, Control of flow around a NACA 0012 airfoil with a micro-
riblet film, J. Fluids Struct. 20 (2005) 659?672.
[35] J.C.  Lin,  Review  of  research  on  low-profile  vortex  generators  to  control 
boundary-layer separation, Prog. Aerosp. Sci. 38 (2002) 389?420.
[36] H.D. Taylor, The Elimination of Diffuser Separation by Vortex Generators, Tech-
nical report No. 4012, United Aircraft Corporation, East Hartford, CT, 1947, p. 3.
[37] G.B. Schubauer, W.G. Spangenberg, Forced mixing in boundary layers, J. Fluid 
Mech. 8 (1960) 10?32.
[38] M.B. Bragg, G.M. Gregorek, Experimental study of airfoil performance with vor-
tex generators, J. Aircr. 24 (1987) 305?309.
[39] W. Calarese, W. Crisler, G. Gustafson, Afterbody drag reduction by vortex gen-
erators, in: 23rd Aerospace Sciences Meeting, 1985, p. 354.
[40] J.C.  Lin,  Review  of  research  on  low-profile  vortex  generators  to  control 
boundary-layer separation, Prog. Aerosp. Sci. 38 (2002) 389?420.
[41] H. Mueller-Vahl, G. Pechlivanoglou, C. Nayeri, C. Paschereit, Vortex generators 
for wind turbine blades: a combined wind tunnel and wind turbine parametric 
study, in: ASME Turbo Expo 2012: Turbine Technical Conference and Exposi-
tion, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2012, pp. 899?914.
[42] M. Koike, T. Nagayoshi, N. Hamamoto, Research on aerodynamic drag reduc-
tion by vortex generators. Mitsubishi Motors Technical Review No. 16 (2004) 
pp. 11?16.
[43] P. Ashill, G. Riddle, Control of leading-edge separation on a cambered delta 
wing, in: AGARD Conference Proceedings AGARD CP, AGARD, 1994, p. 11.
[44] P. Ashill, G. Riddle, M. Stanley, Control of three-dimensional separation on 
highly-swept wings, in: ICAS Proceedings, American Inst. of Aeronautics and 
Astronautics, 1994, p. 2012.
[45] P.R. Ashill, G.L. Riddle, M. Stanley, Separation control on highly-swept wings 
with fixed or variable camber, Aeronaut. J. 99 (1995) 317?327.
[46] P. Ashill, J. Fulker, A review of flow control research at DERA, in: IUTAM 
Symposium on Mechanics of Passive and Active Flow Control, Springer, 1999, 
pp. 43?56.
[47] K. Langan, J. Samuels, Experimental investigation of maneuver performance en-
hancements on an advanced fighter/attack aircraft, in: 33rd Aerospace Sciences 
Meeting and Exhibit, 1995, p. 442.
[48] D.M. Rao, J.F. Campbell, Vortical flow management techniques, Prog. Aerosp. 
Sci. 24 (1987) 173?224.
[49] W. Thielicke, E. Stamhuis, PIVlab ? towards user-friendly, affordable and accu-
rate digital particle image velocimetry in MATLAB, J. Open Res. Softw. 2 (2014).
[50] R.E. Muir, A. Arredondo-Galeana, I.M. Viola, The leading-edge vortex of swift 
wing-shaped delta wings, R. Soc. Open Sci. 4 (2017) 170077.
[51] T. Lee, L. Ko, Ground effect on the vortex flow and aerodynamics of a slender 
delta wing, J. Fluids Eng. 140 (2018) 071104.
[52] J.C. Hunt, A.A. Wray, P. Moin, Eddies, Streams, and Convergence Zones in Tur-
bulent Flows, 1988.
[53] V. Kola?
r, Vortex identification: new requirements and limitations, Int. J. Heat 
Fluid Flow 28 (2007) 638?652.
[54] B. Cabral, L.C. Leedom, Imaging vector fields using line integral convolution, in: 
Proceedings of the 20th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interac-
tive Techniques, ACM, 1993, pp. 263?270.
[55] R. Knowles, M.V. Finnis, A.J. Saddington, K. Knowles, Planar visualization of vor-
tical flows, Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., G J. Aerosp. Eng. 220 (2006) 619?627.
