See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/357795789
Soap bubbles seeding for quantitative time resolved velocity measurements of a
turbulent wake flow behind a cylinder
Conference Paper ・ August 2021
CITATIONS
0
5 authors, including:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
Multi Instrument Manager (MIM) Software Solution View project
Carsten Kykal
TSI Inc.
20 PUBLICATIONS???92 CITATIONS???
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Carsten Kykal on 13 January 2022.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
14th International Symposium on Particle Image Velocimetry - ISPIV 2021 August 1-4, Chicago, USA 
1 
 
Soap bubbles seeding for quantitative time resolved velocity 
measurements of a turbulent wake flow behind a cylinder 
A. Koched1, G. Serra 2, G. Romano2, C. Kykal3, J. Stefanini1 
1TSI France Inc. Hotel Technologique. BP100, Technopole. de Chateau Gombert 13382 Marseille, France 
2University “La Sapienza”, Via Eudossiana 18, 00184 Roma, Italy 
3TSI GmbH Neukollner Strasse 4, 52068 Aachen Germany 
 
Abstract 
The wake flow behind a cylinder of 100mm diameter is investigated using time resolved 2D PIV technique applied 
to an air flow generated in a closed loop open test section wind tunnel. The flow is seeded using a micro soap 
bubble generator (BG-1000, TSI Inc.). The bubbles in the air flow were illuminated with a continuous laser source 
and imaged using a high-speed camera. The main purpose of this study is to show features and advantages of using 
soap bubbles as seeding for a relatively large-scale PIV investigation under low power illumination conditions. 
 
Overview 
            A proper seeding of air flows to get correct Flow Visualization and velocity measurements is an 
important topic especially when considering Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) technique. As it is well 
known, a proper tracer would ideally follow the fluid flow without any deviation and scatter enough light 
to allow acquisition of bright and contrasted images. These two requirements are mutually ruled out, 
basically depending respectively on the inverse of the squared tracer diameter and directly on the squared 
diameter, so that a compromise must be found [1, 2]. While in liquid flows it is quite simple to insert 
spherical solid particles of correct size and density in order to fulfill the previous requirements, in gas 
flows  this  is  not  possible  and  the  attention  was  focused  onto  small  droplets  and  bubbles.  They  are 
generated  by  atomizer  and  sprays,  thus  ensuring  naturally  an  isotropic  spherical  shape,  with  a 
polydisperse size distribution. The  basic  parameter  arising  from  an  exact  solution  of  a  single  particle 
moving in a fluid flow (Basset-Boussinesq-Oseen equation), is the Stokes time scale [1]: 
 
            ????  = ????
????
??2
18 ?
 
 
where ? indicate the density, d the particle diameter, ? the kinematic viscosity and suffix p and f refer to 
particle and fluid.  
Using typical values for a solid hollow particle (d = 10?m) used as a tracer in an air flow, the resulting 
Stokes time scale is in the order of one millisecond or slightly smaller,  which allows to follow flow 
oscillations only down to a hundredth of a second (considering phase shifts, aliasing and other sampling 
problems). However, in a turbulent air wake, the typical scale for vortex shedding could be easily smaller 
than this order of magnitude [3, 4], so far confirming that solid particles must be ruled out. A simple 
evaluation  of  such  a  time  scale  for  oil  or  water  droplets  of  the  same  diameter,  gives  similar  values, 
whereas  the  use  of  bubbles  could  reduce  this  time  by  a  factor  of  around  one  thousand.  This  allows 
investigating higher Reynolds number flows and lower flow scales offering then an excellent alternative 
for seeding air flows in wind tunnels for example. 
14th International Symposium on Particle Image Velocimetry - ISPIV 2021 August 1-4, Chicago, USA 
2 
 
            The second parameter to be considered is the intensity of scattered light from a particle source. 
From Lorenz-Mie theory, an exact solution for an electromagnetic wave scattered by a spherical particle 
can  be  found  and  the  intensity  of  scattered  light  as  a  function  of  particle  diameter,  refractive  index, 
medium properties, angular position of the receiver and light parameters as wavelength and polarization, 
can be computed [2]. For example, for a particle size of 1 ?m or larger, the intensity is proportional to 
the square of the particle diameter, as also predicted by geometrical optics, so far indicating that the use 
of particles bigger in size of a factor 2-3 as tracers, could  lead to nearly ten times higher intensities 
reflected by the individual particles and detected by the camera sensor. 
            There  is  a  third  aspect  to  be  considered  with  particular  care,  which  is  related  to  safety  and 
safeguard procedures for operators and instrumentation. In liquid flows investigation, there is a lower 
chance  of  a  direct  exposure  of  the  users  and  instrumentation  to  the  seeding  particles.  The  risk  of 
contamination due to the seeding particles can also be minimized through the collection, drain, filtration 
and storage of these tracers. However, for seeding air flows, seeking for safe tracers without a major risk 
of contamination, inhalation and deposition on instrumentation might be challenging. Even though when 
health risk is limited, uncomfortable feelings due to a long exposure, to oil smoke/droplets for example, 
cannot be neglected. 
            In the framework of PIV, seeding medium scale to large scale wind tunnels could be challenging. 
In fact, in such facilities, the region of interest is usually quite large, thus requiring high intensity  of 
illumination sources and optimal tracer scattering properties. In addition, the concentration of tracer must 
be  large  and  homogeneous  in  the  whole  investigated  region  which  highlights  the  importance  of  the 
position of the injection of the seeding within the wind tunnel which might be an additional relevant 
constraint  to  be  considered.  Following  previous  concerns,  the  solution  is  addressed  towards  the 
generation  of  high  concentration,  almost  neutrally  buoyant  bubbles  with  long  residence  time  in  the 
facility. So far, the choice was made to test the new Micro bubble generator BG-1000 from TSI Inc. [5], 
to comply with all previous requirements. The generator has been tested in the open test section of the 
subsonic  wind  tunnel  at  La  Sapienza,  University  of  Roma,  for  the  validation  of  a  standard  largely 
investigated flow as the wake of a cylinder. The position of the seeding injection within the wind tunnel, 
as  well  as  the  velocity  of  the  flow  have  been  changed  in  order  to  investigate  their  influence  on  the 
measured mean and instantaneous velocity fields. 
 
Experimental set-up  
            The  BG-1000  surfactant/water-based  micro  bubble  generator,  was  designed  to  produce  soap 
bubbles with diameters of 10-30μm, so far filling the gap between seeding technologies generating tracer 
size of a few microns and others in the interval from a few hundred microns to millimeters. Therefore, 
the soap bubbles from the bubble generator (BG) combine the advantage of a higher scattered signal and 
a better tracer capabilities for capturing even small vortical structures as in boundary layers, jets and 
wakes. This makes the bubbles suitable as seeding particles for planar and volumetric velocimetry, with 
the highest accuracy and spatial resolution in air flows in wind tunnels (opened or closed type) or open 
environments [5].  
            The  working  principle  of  the  BG-1000  is  based  on  cavitation  in  liquid  media  with  a  rapid 
depressurization of a solution initially pressurized to about 70 bars (1000 psi) and consisting of a mixture 
of liquid and 5% to 10% surfactants. The water-surfactant solution dissolves air rapidly and expands at 
the exit of a set of 10 nozzles with a diameter of 200μm each. The implosion process of the bubbles 
further fragments the initial bubble into many smaller micron-sized bubbles forming a plume of neutrally 
buoyant bubbles with high output bubbles concentration (up to 107 bubbles/s). The Stokes number is 
14th International Symposium on Particle Image Velocimetry - ISPIV 2021 August 1-4, Chicago, USA 
3 
 
found equal to 0.12 at 1 kHz motions frequency [5]. The bubbles remain suspended for long periods of 
time (>30min), reducing the need for re-seeding frequently the flow in large facilities [5].  
            PIV measurements have been performed in the subsonic wind tunnel of La Sapienza University 
in  Rome.  The    maximum  free  stream  velocity  reaches  50  m/s  in  this  wind  tunnel,  with  turbulence 
fluctuations around 0.5% at 20 m/s. The open test section being circular with a diameter of around 1 m 
and a length of 1.5 m. The flow is stabilized using honeycombs (with a size of 0.5 cm) and screens placed 
upstream of the test section, in addition to flow stabilizers shaped as curved blades located after the 
upstream bend. A circular cylinder with a diameter of D=0.1 m and a length of 50 cm was inserted at the 
mid of the test section, the wake of the cylinder area of interest was illuminated using a CW diode laser 
with a maximum power of 5W (note that this power has been deliberately chosen as quite low). Images 
of the region extended to around 3 diameters downstream of the cylinder were acquired using a 1MP 
Photron High Speed camera with a pixel size of 20μm and a 50 mm objective with an aperture  of 1.2. 
The frame rate was set to 4 kHz and even at this rate, streaks were recorded from the fastest bubbles 
moving mainly in the main flow stream (Figure 1). However, individual particles in the wake flow of the 
cylinder moving at lower velocity compared to the main stream flow could also be recorded as shown in 
Figure 1. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
 
Figure 1. Example of a raw image showing the wake of the cylinder. Flow stream moving from left to right. 
 
 
Figure 2. Sketch of different positions tested for the soap bubbles seeding injection positions in the wind-tunnel 
(red circles). Flow moving from the left side to the right side. 
14th International Symposium on Particle Image Velocimetry - ISPIV 2021 August 1-4, Chicago, USA 
4 
 
            Raw  images  as  those  reported  in  Figure  1,  were  processed  using  Insight4GR  (TSI  Inc.)  PIV 
software, with an iterative multi-pass algorithm using interrogation windows IW from 64?64 pixels to 
32?32 pixel with 50% overlapping and iterative outlier removal leading to a final spatial resolution of 
~4mm in x and y directions. Instantaneous velocity field were used to investigate vortex dynamics and 
to derive average fields.  
            In this investigation, the parameters which have been varied were the position of the injection of 
the seeding from the BG and the velocity of the main flow stream. Regarding the first one, three different 
positions have been tested; upstream of the wind-tunnel convergent and honeycombs, upstream of the 
convergent and downstream of the test section (Figure 2). The first and the third positions were expected 
to minimize the perturbation of the flow field, but probably also to lead to a lower bubble concentration, 
even if more uniformly distributed. It is important to mention here that the choice was made to keep the 
BG-1000  running  continuously  during  the  tests  to  maintain  a  stable  and  uniform  concentration  of 
particles in the field of view of the camera. Examples of images acquired in the three positions are shown 
in  Figure  3.  A  positioning  of  the  BG  upstream  of  the  convergent  and  honeycombs  ensured  a  rather 
uniform tracer distribution with a good concentration. The laser light sheet was generated from the top 
of the test section using a cylindrical lens to expand the laser beam, resulting in a light sheet of ~3 mm 
of thickness.  
 
  (a)                                                                           (b) 
 (c) 
 
Figure 3. Examples of raw images obtained in the wake of the cylinder for different BG positions: upstream of the wind-
tunnel convergent and honeycombs (a), upstream of convergent (b) and downstream of test section (c).  
14th International Symposium on Particle Image Velocimetry - ISPIV 2021 August 1-4, Chicago, USA 
5 
 
 (a)                                                                       (b) 
 (c) 
 
Figure 4. Examples of acquired images in the wake of a cylinder for different wind-tunnel velocities: 10 m/s (a), 15 m/s (b) 
and 20 m/s (c). The frame rate and shutter speed are the same for all acquisitions.  
 
            When the soap bubbles were injected downstream of the test section, even if the tracer distribution 
in the FOV of the camera was found more uniform, the overall quality of the image was worse compared 
than an upstream positioning of the BG. Among the two upstream positions, there was an evidence of a 
non-uniform distribution and bubble agglomeration in the condition closer to the test section (upstream 
only of the convergent). However, for simple flow visualization purposes, this configuration could be 
useful. Figure 4 shows the impact of the flow velocity on the seeding concentration in the FOV of the 
camera; soap bubbles were injected upstream of the convergent and honeycombs, and the BG was kept 
running continuously. The flow velocity was varied from 10 m/s, to 15 m/s and 20 m/s with Reynolds 
numbers  ranging  from  7?104  to  1.5?105  (based  on  cylinder  diameter  D).  The  image  acquisition 
parameters, as frame and shutter rates were kept constant. It is found that increasing the velocity of the 
flow in the wind tunnel, decreased the tracer concentration in the FOV of the camera. From a simple 
estimation, the concentration decreased by a factor 2 when the flow velocity in the wind tunnel was 
almost doubled (the spanned volume being almost twice) and this is confirmed in the acquired images 
(Figures 4a, 4c). In addition, particle images looked more and more as streaks when the velocity was 
increased, as expected when using a CW laser as illumination source to investigate high velocity flows. 
Even  though,  this  was  not  a  major  concern  in  PIV  image  analysis  since  the  streaks  grayscale  level 
14th International Symposium on Particle Image Velocimetry - ISPIV 2021 August 1-4, Chicago, USA 
6 
 
variation  between  successive  frames  still  lead  to  correlation  peaks  high  enough  to  derive  reliable 
velocities assimilating then the streaks to individual particles up to certain  
Results and discussions         
            The cylinder wake is known to be a severe test for velocity measurement techniques, due to the 
presence of a high dynamical velocity range (from negative values to full free stream velocity), large 
gradients and two interacting shear layers leading to the formation and interaction of coherent vortex 
structures [3, 4]. Therefore, the experimental investigation of such a flow field requires a set-up with 
high spatial and temporal resolutions, as well as a high tracer concentration with a high signal-to-noise 
ratio SNR when PIV investigation is involved for example. 
In Figures 5 and 6, the mean horizontal velocity component fields obtained are shown for the different 
seeding injection positions considered (Figure 5) and different wind-tunnel velocities (Figure 6). The 
main features of the wake cylinder flow could be detected at the top, bottom and recirculating areas. 
However, local limited light illumination areas on the image corners mainly were noticed which might 
be related to a vignetting effect. leading to less confidence in these areas.  
The downstream positioning of the BG has led to a quite different results compared the the upstream 
positioning of the seeding (Figure 5c) and this was derived from the poor tracer scattering already noticed 
in  Figure  3c.  Concerning  the  effect  of  the  velocity  variation  on  the  quality  and  concentration  of  the 
seeding, it is clear that the reduced tracer concentration observed in Figure 4c, has led to a relatively 
decreasing quality of the results when the free-stream velocity was increased (Figure 6).  
 
(a)                                                              (b)                                                              (c) 
Figure  5.  Mean  horizontal  velocity  component  and  velocity  vector  fields  obtained  for  three  different  seeding  injection 
positions: upstream of the wind-tunnel convergent and honeycombs (a), upstream of the convergent (b) and downstream of 
the test section (c). Flow moving from left to right with a free stream velocity of 15 m/s. 
(a)                                                              (b)                                                         (c) 
Figure 6. Mean horizontal velocity component and vector fields as derived from the different wind-tunnel velocities: 10 m/s 
(a), 15 m/s (b) and 20 m/s (c). Flow from left to right with BG positioned upstream of the convergent and honeycombs. 
14th International Symposium on Particle Image Velocimetry - ISPIV 2021 August 1-4, Chicago, USA 
7 
 
A more quantitative analysis was performed by considering transverse and axial profiles of the horizontal 
velocity component (Figures 7 and 8). The position upstream of the convergent and the honeycomb is 
indicated as “upup”, upstream of the convergent as “up” and downstream as “down”: 
 
 (a)                                                                         (b) 
 (c)                                                                         (d) 
Figure 7. Transverse profiles of the mean horizontal velocity component at 1×D (on the left) and 2×D (on the right) distances 
from the cylinder as derived from three different seeding injection positions (a and b) and wind-tunnel velocities (c and d). 
 
            In the transverse plots, obtained at one diameter and two diameters downstream of the cylinder 
(Figure 7), the PIV data are compared to the data obtained in a similar experimental arrangement using 
the Hot Wire Anemometry (HWA) and to the recent data obtained by  Gao et al. (2019) [4]. For the 
comparison, two points must be considered: first, the HWA was a single-wire probe configuration, not 
suitable for detecting negative velocities in the near wake which explains the differences close to the 
centerline seen in Figure 7, whereas in the shear layer the results were similar. The second point is that 
the cylinder considered in this study had a length to diameter aspect ratio of 5,  which is expected to have 
a direct impact of the shape of the wake flow [3], so far explaining the thicker amplitude of the wake in 
comparison  to  that  measured  by  Gao  et  al.  (2019).  Regarding  the  impact  of  the  seeding  injection 
positions, it turns out that both upstream positions appear to be much more suitable for capturing the flow 
features  expected  in  comparison  to  the  downstream  position  (note  that  the  BG  is  kept  running 
continuously in the different configurations tested). Considering the different wind-tunnel velocities, it 
is evident that this has not a relevant effect on the obtained results, excluding the border area limits in 
the FOV as discussed earlier (Figure 6). 
            Considering the velocity profiles obtained at the centerline along the streamwise direction (Figure 
8), again the major differences are seen in the border areas of the FOV when the seeding is injected 
14th International Symposium on Particle Image Velocimetry - ISPIV 2021 August 1-4, Chicago, USA 
8 
 
downstream of the test section. In addition, the fluctuations detected in the velocity profiles (Figure 8) 
could be related to a poor statistical convergence of the data for the mean velocity as the 1000 images 
were acquired only in a single slot; a  choice that was driven by  the  requirement of a high temporal 
resolution (4 kHz) and continuous recording to detect the vortex dynamics.  
 (a)                                                                                               (b) 
Figure 8. Streamwise profiles of the mean horizontal velocity component measured at the cylinder centerline for three different 
seeding injection positions (a) and three different wind-tunnel velocities (b). 
 
(a)                                                               (b)                                               (c) 
Figure 9. Horizontal rms velocity and vectors as derived from three  different BG positions:  upstream of the wind-tunnel 
convergent and honeycombs (a), upstream of the convergent (b) and downstream of the test section (c). Flow moving from 
left to right with a free stream velocity of 15 m/s. 
 
              The plots in Figure 9 show a clear dependence of the rms velocity to the quality of the seeding. 
However,  a  noticeable  dependence  to  the  velocity  variation  was  not  detected.  Hence,  only  results 
obtained for the different BG positions were reported in Figure 9. Furthermore, the areas on the border 
of the acquired image, where a poor illumination was reported previously, showed clearly less accurate 
results, especially when the seeding was injected downstream of the test section. However, the purpose 
of investigating these quantities is to emphasize the strength of PIV algorithm to depict the physical 
features of the flow even at poor experimental conditions related to seeding density, illumination and 
image quality.  
            As previously stated, the major advantages of a High-Speed PIV system is the ability to detect 
instantaneous velocity and vorticity fields and to investigate vortical structures generation, interaction 
and  dissipation.  From  this  point  of  view,  the  cylinder  wake  is  a  typical  flow  field  in  which  vortex 
shedding occur for Re close to ~105, when the top and bottom boundary layers (identified in the vorticity 
14th International Symposium on Particle Image Velocimetry - ISPIV 2021 August 1-4, Chicago, USA 
9 
 
fields shown in Figure 10) separates from the surface of the cylinder to form a highly unstable free shear 
layer. This shear layer rolled into discrete vortices of different sizes that detach from the surface as shown 
by the velocity gradient invariant criterion used for the detection of the vortex center core (Figure 10). 
                                                                                                         
 
                                                                                                         
 
                                                                                                         
Figure 9. A sample of nine instantaneous velocity vector and vorticity fields, separated by 1/400 s (i.e under sampled by one 
frame  over  ten  in  comparison  to  the  original  frame  rate).  Seeding  injected  upstream  of  the  wind-tunnel  convergent  and 
honeycombs. Flow moving from left to right with a free stream velocity of 15 m/s. 
14th International Symposium on Particle Image Velocimetry - ISPIV 2021 August 1-4, Chicago, USA 
10 
 
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                               
Figure 10. A sample of six instantaneous velocity vectors fields superposed to vortex detection criterion contours, derived 
from the last six plots shown in Figure 9. 
 
Conclusion 
The current study confirmed the capability to use soap bubbles generated using the micro soap bubbles 
generator BG-1000 (TSI Inc.) as seeding for performing TR-PIV measurement in a turbulent air flow in 
the wake of a cylinder. The TR-PIV investigation were performed for stream velocities up to 20m/s, in 
a relatively large FOV of 300mm×300mm and under limited illumination condition using a CW Laser 
and a high-speed camera. With optimizing the positioning of the injection of the seeding in the flow, the 
main features of the flow including shear layers and coherent turbulent structures were correctly detected 
using  TR-PIV.  For  the  velocity  range  considered,  streaky  images  were  not  a  limitation  for  the  PIV 
processing whenever a grayscale level variation could be detected between the frames.  
 
References 
1.   H.C. Van de HulstLight, Scattering by Small Particles, Dover Publications Inc., 2003 
2.   Ejected particle size measurement using Mie scattering in high explosive driven shockwave experiments. S. 
K. Monfared et al., J. Appl. Phys. 117, 223105 (2015).  
3.   An experimental investigation of the flow around a circular cylinder: influence of aspect ratio. C. Norberg, J. 
Fluid Mech., 258, 287-316, 1994. 
4.   Effects of steady wake-jets on subcritical cylinder flow, D. Gao, G. Chen, Y. Huang, H. Li, Experimental 
Thermal and Fluid Science, 102, 575-588, 2019 
5.   Air-filled  soap  bubbles  for  volumetric  velocity  measurements,  D.C.  Barros,  Y.  Duan,  D.R.  Troolin,  E.K. 
Longmire, Experiments in Fluids 62 (2), 1-12. 
View publication stats
View publication stats
