ORIGINALS
Markus Honkanen AE  Holger Nobach
Background extraction from double-frame PIV images
Received: 18 May 2004 / Revised: 3 December 2004 / Accepted: 4 December 2004 / Published online: 1 February 2005
 Springer-Verlag 2005
Abstract  This  study  presents  a  simple  image  pre-pro-
cessing scheme to extract background information from
double-frame  particle  image  velocimetry  (PIV)  images.
Everything that stays stagnant in the image (e.g., image
background   and   light   reflections   from   stationary
objects) is assumed to be a source of disturbance and is
removed by subtracting the second frame of the image
pair  from  the  first  frame.  This  yields  a  single  frame
difference  image,  which  is  transferred  back  to  a  back-
ground extracted double-frame image. After the proce-
dure  the  background  in  the  image  does  not  correlate
with  itself  anymore  and  therefore  a  bias  error  in  PIV
analysis  towards  zero  displacement  is  avoided.  The
simulations show that the procedure conserves the pro-
file   of   tracer   particle   images   when   a   displacement
between the frames is larger than a particle image size.
The performance of this procedure is emphasized with
various  examples,  and  extensions  of  the  procedure  are
introduced.   The   extended   procedure   extracts   back-
ground objects that move between the image frames, e.g.
dispersed  phase  particles  in  a  two-phase  flow  or  laser
light sheet reflections from moving objects.
1 Introduction
The  performance  of  particle  image  velocimetry  (PIV)
depends on the image acquisition (i.e., experiment) and
signal processing. The signal processing can be divided
into  image  pre-processing,  image  correlation  and  data
post-processing. The aim of this study is to improve the
performance  of  the  PIV  technique  by  means  of  a  new
image   pre-processing   scheme.   Image   pre-processing
refers  to  noise  removal  from  a  PIV  image  prior  to
applying an image correlation function. Image pre-pro-
cessing  can  only  serve  to  destroy  or  rearrange  the
information as new information clearly cannot be added
after  the  experiment  (Fincham  and  Spedding  1997).
However, image pre-processing can improve the quality
of  particle  images  to  some  extent  and  ease  the  image
correlation   remarkably   while   saving   computational
costs.  The  image  pre-processing  will  preserve  the  mea-
surement  accuracy  if  it  does  not  change  the  grey-scale
profile of particle images.
The quality of the images should normally be insured
already  in  the  image  acquisition  stage,  optimizing  the
particle illumination, camera positioning and optics, and
minimizing  the  background  noise  in  the  images.  To
maximize  the  information  content  of  the  images,  the
pixel  intensities  should  cover  the  allowable  brightness
resolution range. The contrast should be maximized to
provide  tracer   particle   images   that   are   distinctively
brighter  than  the  background,  without  saturating  the
particle  profiles  (Fincham  and  Spedding  1997).  If  the
double  pulsed  lasers  are  configured  incorrectly,  two
frames  of  the  image  pair  have  different  grey-scale  his-
tograms.  This  might  produce  changing  intensities  for
particles that are not even moving (Willert 1997).
The  background  noise  consists  of  the  image’s  local
background  grey-scale  level  (i.e.,  offset)  and  random
noise  above  it.  Image  offset  and  laser  light  reflections
from  the  stationary  objects  correlate  with  themselves
and cause a bias error in a correlation analysis towards
zero displacement. In addition, offset increases all cor-
relation values over the interrogation area and creates a
non-Gaussian   profile   of   a   correlation   peak,   which
increases the pixel locking effect in the image correlation.
The offset can be caused by the dark-noise of the camera
sensor, zero-level grey-scale typical for CMOS sensors,
environmental  light  coming  into  the  camera  sensor
and laser light reflections and glow from the fluid. The
M. Honkanen (&)
Energy and Process Engineering,
Tampere University of Technology,
P.O. Box 589, FIN-33101 Tampere, Finland
E-mail: markus.honkanen@tut.fi
H. Nobach
Stro¨mungslehre und Aerodynamik,
Darmstadt University of Technology,
Petersenstrasse 30, D-64287 Darmstadt, Germany
Experiments in Fluids (2005) 38: 348?362
DOI 10.1007/s00348-004-0916-x
random noise is caused for instance by the camera’s dark
noise,  by  photon  noise,  by  the  light  scattering  from
objects  other  than  tracer  particles  in  the  fluid  and  by
light  scattering  from  interacting  particles.  Background
noise  changes  the  grey-scale  distribution  of  particle
images,  which  leads  to  stochastic  errors  in  the  image
correlation analysis.
The  commonly  used  noise  removal  methods  can  be
divided  into  five  different  categories.  The  global  offset
can be removed simply by subtracting a constant value
from  the  image,  but  then  the  local  changes  in  the
background cannot be followed. A mean grey-scale va-
lue approximately represents the mean background with
a particle image density of 0.1 per  pixel, which is typical
for PIV. However, the local offset with intensity gradi-
ents is removed more accurately by subtracting a refer-
ence  image,  which  represents  a  background  of  a  PIV
image,  from  the  original  image.  This  background  sub-
traction is also called a levelization (Todd and Hassan
2001). The reference image can be obtained in the fol-
lowing ways:
1.  It is acquired during measurements of an illuminated
flow without particles.
2.  It is computed as an average or local minimum from
all samples of the measurement set (Gui et al. 1997;
Wereley et al. 2002).
3.  It  is  computed  using  a  linear  or  non-linear  filter
individually   for   each   sample.   Willert   (1997)   has
demonstrated  a  low-pass  filtered  background  image
with a linear smoothing filter. Westerweel (1997) has
suggested  a  subtraction  of  an  average  inside  each
interrogation window. The commercial PIV software
of LaVision and Dantec provide non-linear filters for
this  purpose.  Dantec  proposes  an  erosion  filter  for
background  removal  (Dantec  Dynamics  2002)  and
LaVision  proposes  a  sliding  minimum  filter  (LaVi-
sion  2003)  or  optionally  a  sliding  average  filter.  In
addition, the reference image can be produced with a
local median filter or rather with a modified median
type of filter (Scholz and Ka¨hler 2004) that considers
the intensity range of tracer particle images.
4.  In  the  proposed  procedure,  the  reference  image,
which  is  individual  for  each  sample,  is  the  second
image  frame  of  the  double  frame  PIV  image.  This
means  that  the  second  frame  of  the  image  pair  is
subtracted from the first one. The procedure can be
extended   to   moving   background   objects.   Before
subtraction  the  extended  procedure  translates  the
second frame in line with background objects.
The reference image obtained with items (1) and (2) is
temporally averaged and it cannot follow the temporal
changes of the background image. The items (3) and (4)
produce  an  instantaneous  reference  image,  which  fol-
lows  the  changes  in  the  background  grey-scale  level
spatially  and  temporally.  The  background  extraction
procedure (item 4) is able to capture all spatial changes
in  the  background  grey-scale  level,  while  the  spatial
frequency response for filter functions is limited by the
kernel size that determines the filter. If the image back-
ground  changes  during  the  time  delay  between  the
frames,  residuals  of  the  background  still  remain  after
background   extraction.   The   residuals   do   not   have
counterparts  in  the  other  frame  and  therefore  they  do
not  correlate  with  themselves;  they  only  produce  sto-
chastic  errors.  Stochastic  errors  are  reduced  with  the
extended   procedure   that   follows   the   movement   of
background  objects.  Table 1  shows  those  sources  of
noise  can  be  eliminated  by  the  background  extraction
procedure.
The main difference between items (3) and (4) is on
what basis they discriminate the particle images from the
image background. The filtering functions suggest that
particle   images   are   small   compared   to   background
objects and the discrimination is based on the difference
in image size, while the background extraction procedure
discriminates  the  particle  images  from  the  background
objects based on the difference in motion. For images of
dispersed  two-phase  flow,  Delnoij  et  al.  (1999)  have
developed a phase discrimination method that relies on
the inherent differences in the motion of the two phases
to  discriminate  between  them.  The  separation  is  per-
formed  in  correlation  space  by  identifying  the  two
dominant  correlation  peaks,  where  one  represents  the
motion of the tracer particles while the other provides the
displacement of the dispersed phase. A velocity difference
between  a  dispersed  phase  object  and  the  continuous
phase  has  to  be  large  enough  to  avoid  interference  of
signals of the two phases. In the background extraction
procedure, the discrimination of background objects and
the signal of tracer particles is also based on the principle
presented by Delnoij et al. (1999), except that the phase
separation  is  already  completed  in  the  pre-processing
stage before the image correlation.
2 Background extraction procedure
Here a new pre-processing scheme is presented. Every-
thing that stays stagnant in the image is assumed to be a
Table 1  The types of noise in the image and their removal
Source of noise           Type of noise    Removed
with
background
extraction
Removed
with extended
background
extraction
Zero-level                    Offset                Yes                Yes
Dark noise                  Random            No                 No
Photon noise               Random            No                 No
Environment light       Offset                Yes                Yes
Varying illumination   Offset/random   Yes/no           Yes/no
Laser light from
stationary objects
Offset                Yes                Yes
Laser light from
moving objects
Random            No                 Yes
349
source  of  bias  and  is  removed.  Stagnant  objects  are
simply removed by subtracting the second frame of the
image  pair  from  the  first  frame.  This  yields  an  auto-
correlation type of single frame difference image, where
the particle images  belonging to the first frame have a
positive sign and the other particle images belonging to
the  second  frame  have  a  negative  sign.  Therefore,  the
image  can  be  transferred  to  a  background  extracted
double-frame image moving all the positive values to the
first frame and  negative values to the  second  frame  of
the image and changing their sign back to positive.
The  background  extracted  image  consists  only  of
moving   particle   images,   zero-background   level   and
random noise. At least 50% of the image pixels have a
grey-scale  value  of  zero.  This  means  that  whenever  an
image pixel in one of the frames has a non-zero value,
the corresponding  pixel in the  other frame is zero.  The
zero-values are not necessarily distributed equally between
the frames.
In  the  case  of  an  unequal  illumination  between  the
frames, the background extraction procedure leads to an
erroneous result. If the two image frames have unequal
background  intensity,  the  background  extraction  pro-
cedure  will  result  in  a  double-frame  image,  where  one
frame  has particle images  with  an offset and the other
has   zero-background   with   shallow   particle   images,
whose edges are cut off. This can be avoided by applying
grey-scale equalization prior to the background extrac-
tion  procedure.  The  unequal  peak  intensities  between
the image frames can be equalized by dividing grey-scale
values with corresponding values of sliding average grey-
scale  in that frame. Also  a min?max filter  (Meyer  and
Westerweel  2000)  or  a  histogram  equalization  (Todd
and Hassan 2001) can be applied for this purpose. Even
if the intensities in the frames are not properly equalized,
after background extraction the remaining offset in one
of the frames does not correlate with itself anymore.
Figure 1 shows grey-scale histograms from a sample
image (Fig. 2a) that is pre-processed by the background
extraction procedure. It shows histograms of difference-
images   and   background   extracted   images   with   and
without image equalization and a histogram of a sliding
average  subtracted  image.  The  background  noise  con-
sists of a strong reflection in the middle of the image and
smaller noise sources that correspond to grey-scale val-
ues  less  than  1,000  counts.  The  background  grey-scale
level, which corresponds to the peak of the histogram,
should be placed at zero to avoid the image correlation
errors.  The  subtraction  of  a  sliding  average  places  the
background  grey-scale  level  at  a  negative  value,  which
increases   the   pixel   locking   effect.   The   background
extraction  procedure  places  the  peak  of  the  histogram
always near zero. Comparison of the histograms shows
that   the   background   extraction   without   grey-scale
equalization  eliminates  background  noise,  as  does  the
subtraction  of  a  sliding  average,  and  it  performs  even
better when the grey-scale equalization is applied.
3 Extensions of the background extraction procedure
Extensions  of  the  procedure  are  necessary  if  the  laser
light-sheet   reflection   or   other   background   noise   is
moving between the frames. The background extraction
procedure  can  be  applied  to  the  areas  attached  to  the
moving background objects instead of to the entire field
of view. The background objects can be detected based
on  image  size  and  brightness  or  by  applying  a  2D-
median filter (Kiger and Pan 2000). The displacements
of  the  background  objects  can  be  defined  with  an
Fig. 1  The grey-scale
histograms of an original
image, of difference images and
background extracted images
with and without grey-scale
equalization between the
frames, and of an image after
subtraction of the output of
sliding average
350
appropriate particle tracking algorithm and the second
frame can be subtracted after translating the frame with
a  given  displacement.  If  the  background  noise  is  high
everywhere  in  the  image,  the  background  extraction
procedure can first be executed once to the entire field of
view  and  then  to  the  segments  of  moving  background
objects.  The  following  examples  emphasize  the  perfor-
mance  of  the  extended  procedure.  These  extensions
make the background extraction procedure an efficient
tool  to  study  the  PIV  images  of  two-phase  flow  or
images    with    moving    background    objects.    After
employing  the  background  extraction  procedure,  the
signals of tracer particles can be detected even on top of
a highly reflective object (e.g., bubble or a solid surface).
4 Applications
The  performance  of  the  procedure  is  demonstrated
using  the  applications  described  below.  In  all  applica-
tions, the image correlation analysis is performed with a
standard  multi-pass  FFT  algorithm  with  interrogation
window  sizes  from  64・64  to  16・16 pixels  with  50%
overlap.
4.1 Application: the flow close to a solid boundary
When the fluid dynamics in a mixing vessel are studied,
the  main  area  of  interest  is  located  in  a  propeller  dis-
charge zone. The PIV experiments can be synchronized
with a propeller blade angle to resolve velocity fields in
each  phase  angle. The example image here  is  captured
immediately after  the propeller blade left the measure-
ment plane (in a phase angle of 5). Reflections from the
vertically aligned propeller blade tip in the middle of the
image are still visible (Fig. 2a). Figure 2 shows an ori-
ginal  image  and  a  background  extracted  image,  where
the  image  frames  are  overlayed  on  top  of  each  other.
The  raw  vector  fields  derived  from  the  images  are
shown  in  Fig. 3.  The  erroneous  vectors  caused  by  the
laser  light  reflection  from  the  propeller  blade  tip  in
Fig. 3a  cannot  be  seen  in  Fig. 3b.  This  application
impressively shows the effect of the background extrac-
tion procedure. However, a proper validation procedure
could have also removed all the spurious vectors from
both  vector  fields,  so  in  this  case  the  pre-processing
scheme is not essential. In the following applications, the
background extraction procedure with its extensions is
clearly superior.
4.2 Application: the flow around a turbine blade tip
The flow of fluorescent particles is acquired with a dig-
ital  camera  that  is  equipped  with  a  high-pass  optical
filter. This optical signal discrimination ideally prevents
all  the  Mie  scattering  of  laser  light  from  entering  the
camera. Figure 4a shows flow over a turbine blade tip at
a  condition  where  the  blade  is  perpendicular  to  the
measurement plane. The direction of the laser light sheet
illumination is downwards in a plane which partly tou-
ches  the  blade  tip  moving  upwards.  Even  with  optical
Fig. 2  a Original image. b Background extracted image
351
signal  discrimination  and  the  painted  black  surface  of
the  turbine,  the  light  reflections  on  the  blade  tip  are
strong. The reflections are correlated in the image cor-
relation   analysis   and   a   resultant   vector   field   has
numerous  erroneous  vectors  in  the  region  close  to  the
blade (see Fig. 4b). However, the signal of particles still
exists above the reflections of the solid surface. This can
be  seen  in  Fig. 5a,  tracing  the  profiles  of  grey-scale
values along the horizontal and vertical lines on the top
of the turbine blade tip. After the background extraction
in  Fig. 5b,  the  reflections  of  the  solid  surface  are  re-
moved and only the  particle  images  remain.  The grey-
scale  values  corresponding  to  turbine  blade  reflections
are  subtracted  conserving  the  grey-scale  profile  of  the
particle images and shifting the image background to a
zero  value.  Figure 6a  shows  the  vector  field  calculated
from the  background  extracted image,  from which the
small  amount  of  erroneous  vectors  can  be  easily  re-
moved  in  the  validation  process  and  an  undisturbed
vector field of a fluid motion over a turbine blade tip is
acquired.
The  discrimination  of  noise  sources  and  tracer  par-
ticle  images  allows  a  digital  mask  technique to be em-
ployed (Gui et al. 2003). The digital mask is produced
with   a   2D-median   filter   to   mask   the   image   pixels
attached  to  the  turbine  blade  tip  from  the  correlation
analysis.  In  this  study,  a  simplified  digital  mask  tech-
nique is applied after the correlation analysis to remove
the erroneous vectors of the raw vector field (Fig. 4b) on
top of the digital mask. The results of simplified digital
masking can be seen in Fig. 6b. The masking technique
reliably removes all the information on top of the large
reflection to obtain a smooth vector field after validation
and interpolation. However, the background extraction
procedure has preserved information on the top of the
strong  reflections  and,  therefore,  more  reliable  fluid
velocity estimates are obtained from that region.
4.3 Application: bubbly flow in a mixing vessel
Two  examples  of  bubbly  flow  with  tracer  particles  are
considered.  The  flow  is  illuminated  with  two  diode
lasers, one producing a light sheet and another used as a
back-light. The first example image is shown in Fig. 7a,
where  a  bubble  moves  up  and  to  the  left,  towards  the
center  of  a  vortex.  Each  image  frame  is  exposed  four
times  with  a  light  sheet  and  once  with  a  back-light
simultaneously   with   the   last   light   sheet   pulse.   The
background subtraction procedure is applied, obtaining
the  image  in  Fig. 7b.  Figure 8a  shows  the  raw  vector
field  derived  from  an  original  image,  where  the  move-
ment  of  a  bubble  is  strongly  correlated,  leading  to
erroneous vectors on top of the bubble. Figure 8b shows
the raw vector field of the background extracted image,
where the fluid flow field is captured correctly, even on
top  of  the  bubble  without  any  interference  from  the
bubble image.
Figure 9  shows  another  example  of  a  bubbly  flow
where a large bubble is moving upwards in a counter-
flow.   The   flow   is   illuminated   twice,   simultaneously
with  a  light  sheet  and  a  back-light.  The  calculated
vector fields, without and  with background  extraction,
Fig. 3  Raw vector fields of a original and b background extracted
images
352
Fig. 4  a An overlaid double-frame image of a flow of fluorescent particles over a turbine blade tip. b Obtained raw vector field
353
are  shown  in  Fig. 10a  and  b,  respectively.  The  vector
field  in  Fig. 10a  has  erroneous  vectors  that  are  corre-
lated  to  edges  of  bubble  shadow  that  moves  upwards.
After   extracting   the   bubble   shadow,   the   calculated
vector field in Fig. 10b correctly follows the movement
of  tracer  particles.  These  applications  clearly  show  the
excellent  capability  of  the  background  extraction  pro-
cedure   to   remove   background   from   PIV   images.
Next  the  limitations  of  the  procedure  are  quantified
and   the   errors   are   analyzed   with   artificial   particle
images.
5 Limitations of the procedure and error analysis
The drawback of the background extraction procedure
is that  the particle  displacements should be more  than
one particle image width, not to consider also the par-
ticle  images  as  a  source  of  bias  and  subtract  them.  In
addition, in the case of high particle image density the
probability  that  particle  images  overlap  in  consecutive
frames  increases  and  consequently  the  probability  of
subtraction of particle images increases, which increases
the random noise. To quantify the bias due to subtrac-
tion  of  overlapping  particle  images  numerical  simula-
tions have been performed. Two bias sources have been
investigated independently.
If  the  displacement  of  the  particle  images  is  small
compared to the particle image width, the difference in
the two images affects the particle image shapes and a
systematic  bias  occurs.  Figure 11a  shows  the  obtained
bias  as  a  function  of  the  displacement  for  different
particle  image  widths.  For  the  simulation  a  Gaussian
model has been used. The width is determined by e2 of
the  maximum  intensity.  The  bias  also  depends  on  the
sub-pixel location of the particle images and the orien-
tation  of  the  displacement.  Therefore,  the  standard
deviation of the bias is shown for a series of 100 random
realizations.
The  obtained  bias  decreases  with  increasing  dis-
placement,  down  to  a  certain  value  which  does  not
vanish  even  for  larger  displacements.  This  remaining
bias  is  caused  by  the  under-sampling  of  the  particle
images  and  corresponds  to  earlier  investigations  (No-
bach  et  al. 2004).  For  larger  particle  image  widths  the
bias  for  a  given  displacement  is  larger,  while  for  suffi-
ciently large displacements the remaining bias due to the
under-sampling is smaller.
Figure 11b  shows  the  obtained  systematic  bias  as  a
function of the displacement normalized by the particle
image diameter. For small arguments the remaining bias
is larger for large particle images, while for large argu-
ments the remaining bias due to the under-sampling is
larger  for  small  particle  images.  In  the  intermediate
range the curves overlap, which indicates that the bias is
determined  only  by  the  normalized  displacement.  The
simulation justifies the displacement limit of one particle
image width.
For  the  experimental  data  of  complex,  turbulent
flows  with  recirculation  zones,  the  procedure  would
produce   errors   at   regions   of   particle   displacements
smaller  than  a  particle  image  diameter,  while  conven-
tional PIV would only suffer from loss of accuracy. In
the PIV technique there is a rule of thumb by which the
time delay dt between the two exposures should be large
enough to allow particle displacements in the image to
exceed five pixels in order to decrease the relative mea-
surement  error.  However,  the  errors  related  to  the
velocity  gradients  of  the  flow  associated  with  in-plane
loss-of-particle  pairs  and  out-of-plane  loss-of-particle
pairs  limit  the  selection  of  dt.  The  largest  value  inside
these limitations should be chosen. Ka¨hler (2004) stud-
ied  the  separation  bubble  in  a  boundary  layer  of  an
aerofoil with a time-resolved PIV (TRPIV). The particle
displacements  on  the  separation  bubble  were  so  small
that   only   erroneous   vectors   were   obtained.   Ka¨hler
(2004) solved the problem by locally optimizing dt using
Fig. 5  Vertical and horizontal grey-scale profiles of a an original
image, and b a background extracted image of a flow over a turbine
blade tip
354
a  multi-frame  PIV  method  (Ka¨hler  and  Kompenhans
2000). Time resolved PIV (TRPIV) with the multi-frame
PIV   method   allows   a   large   increase   in   applicable
dynamic   range   of  PIV   measurements.   Therefore,   it
would   attenuate   the   displacement   limitation   of   the
proposed procedure.
Fig. 6  a Raw vector field
obtained from background
extracted image. b Raw vector
field obtained from original
image after applying a digital
mask technique
355
For   large   particle   densities   the   probability   of
particle  images  affecting  other  particle  images  causes
a   random   bias,   which   is   shown   in   Fig. 12a   as   a
function  of  the  particle  density  for  different  particle
image   widths.   The   shown   values   are   the   obtained
standard  deviation  values  of  the  bias  for  a  series  of
100  random  realizations.  The  bias  linearly  depends  on
the   density   to   the   power   of   1/3   and   the   particle
Fig. 7  An overlaid multi-
exposure double-frame image
of a bubble moving towards the
vortex. a Original image.
b Image after grey-scale
equalization and an extended
background extraction
procedure
356
image  width  to  the  power  of  3/2.  For  comparison,
Fig. 12b shows the bias as a function of the density to
the  power  of  1/3  normalized  with  the  particle  image
width  to  the  power  of  3/2.  The  overlaid  curves  show
that  the  bias  is  determined  by  the  normalized  particle
density.
The errors due to subtraction of overlapping particle
images  increase  with  increasing  particle  image  density,
but remain below 0.2 pixels. Typically a PIV image has a
particle  image  density  of  0.1  per pixel  with  a  particle
image width of 2 pixels, which corresponds to a standard
deviation error of 0.03 pixels. For comparison, the dou-
Fig. 8  Raw vector fields
obtained from a the original
image, and b the background
extracted image (Fig. 7b)
357
ble-exposure  single  frame  images  with  varying  particle
image densities are simulated and studied with an auto-
correlation function. The obtained standard deviation of
a random bias remains larger than 0.1 pixels for all cases.
6 Conclusions
The  background  extraction  procedure  ensures  that  the
bias  error  towards  zero  displacement  caused  by  an
offset  and  background  objects  is  eliminated  from  PIV
analysis.  It  also  reduces  the  pixel  locking  effect  by
placing the background grey-scale level to a zero value.
Fig. 9  An overlaid double-frame image of a large bubble moving
upwards. a Original image. b After grey-scale equalization and an
extended background extraction procedure
358
The  procedure  discriminates  the  tracer  particle  images
from  the  background  based  on  the  difference  in  mo-
tion.  The  procedure  produces  an  instantaneous  back-
ground image, which accurately follows the changes in
the  background  grey-scale  level  spatially  and  tempo-
rally. If the image background changes during the time
delay between the frames, residuals of the background
remain.  However,  the  residuals  do  not  have  counter-
Fig. 10  Raw vector fields obtained from a the original image, and b
the background extracted image (Fig. 9b)
359
parts in the other frame and therefore do not correlate
with  themselves  and  only  produce  stochastic  errors.
Furthermore,  stochastic  errors  are  reduced  with  the
extended   procedure   that   follows   the   movement   of
background  objects.  The  procedure  works  better  than
digital filtering, because it is able to capture all spatial
changes  in  the  background  grey-scale  level,  while  the
spatial frequency response for filter functions is limited
by   the   kernel   size   that   determines   the   filter.   The
advantage in comparison to digital masking techniques
is   that   after   employing   the   background   extraction
procedure,  the  signals  of  tracer  particles  can  be  de-
tected  even  on  top  of  highly  reflective  objects  (e.g.,  a
bubble or solid surface), while the digital mask removes
this information. The background extraction procedure
is  limited  by  the  fact  that  the  particle  displacements
should  be  more  than  one  particle  image  width,  not  to
consider  also  the  particle  images  as  a  source  of  bias
and  subtract  them.  In  addition,  in  the  case  of  high
particle   image   density   the   probability   that   particle
images  overlap  in  consecutive  frames  increases  and
consequently  the  probability  of  subtraction  of  particle
images   increases,   which   leads   to   stochastic   errors.
However,  the  described  procedure  works  reliably  for
double-frame  PIV  images  that  have  high  noise  level
and   disturbance   from   stationary   or   moving   back-
ground objects. It yields an image that consists only of
moving   particle   images,   zero-background   level   and
random   noise.   Appropriate   applications   have   been
shown.
References
Dantec Dynamics (2002) FlowManager Manual. Dantec Dynamics
A/S, Skovlunde, Denmark
Fig. 11  a Systematic bias as a
function of the displacement for
different particle image widths.
b Systematic bias as a function
of the displacement normalized
by the particle image diameter
360
Delnoij  E,  Westerweel  J,  Deen  NG,  Kuipers  JAM,  van  Swaaij
WPM  (1999)  Ensemble  correlation  PIV  applied  to  bubble
plumes  rising  in  a  bubble  column.  Chem  Eng  Sci  54:5159?
5171
Fincham  AM,  Spedding  GR  (1997)  Low  cost,  high  resolution
DPIV  for  measurement  of  turbulent  fluid  flow.  Exp  Fluids
23:449?462
Gui L, Merzkirch W, Shu JZ (1997) Evaluation of low image den-
sity PIV recordings with the MQD method and application to
the flow in a liquid bridge. J Flow Visual Image Proc 4:333?343
Gui L, Wereley ST, Kim YH (2003) Advances and applications of
the   digital   mask   technique   in   particle   image   velocimetry
experiments. Meas Sci Technol 14:1820?1828
Ka¨hler C (2004) Evaluation of time resolved PIV image sequences
with  dynamic  evaluation  algorithms.  Pivnet  T5/ERCOFTAC
SIG 32 7th Workshop on PIV, Lisbon, 9?10 July 2004
Ka¨hler   C,   Kompenhans   J   (2000)   Fundamentals   of   multiple
plane stereo particle image velocimetry. Exp Fluids 29:S70?S77
Kiger  KT,  Pan  C  (2000)  PIV  technique  for  the  simultaneous
measurement of dilute two-phase flows. J Fluids Eng 122:811?
818
LaVision  (2003)  DaVis  PIV-Manual.  LaVision  GmbH,  Goettin-
gen, Germany
Meyer  KE,  Westerweel  J  (2000)  Advection  velocities  of  flow
structures estimated from particle image velocimetry measure-
ments in a pipe. Exp Fluids 29:S237?S247
Nobach  H,  Damaschke  N,  Tropea  C  (2004)  High-precision  sub-
pixel interpolation in PIV/PTV image processing. In: Proceedings
of   the   12th   international   symposium   on   application   of
laser technology to fluid mechanics, Lisbon, Portugal, Paper No.
24.1
Scholz  U,  Ka¨hler  C  (2004)  Automated  image  processing  and
segmentation  for  mask  generation  in  PIV.  In:  Proceedings
of  the  12th  international  symposium  on  application  of  laser
technology  to  fluid  mechanics,  Lisbon,  Portugal,  Paper  No.
18.1
Todd DR, Hassan YA (2001) Analysis of bubbly flow using par-
ticle image velocimetry. In: Proceedings of the fourth interna-
tional  symposium  on  particle  image  velocimetry,  Go¨ttingen,
Germany, 17?19 September, Paper No. 1090
Fig. 12  a Random bias as a
function of the particle density
for different particle image
widths. b Random bias as a
function of the density to the
power of 1/3 normalized with
the particle image width to the
power of 3/2
361
Wereley  ST,  Gui  L,  Meinhart  CD  (2002)  Advanced  algorithms
for  microscale  particle  image  velocimetry.  AIAA  J  40:1047?
1055
Westerweel J (1997) Fundamentals of digital particle image veloc-
imetry data. Meas Sci Technol 8:1379?1392
Willert  C  (1997)  Stereoscopic  digital  particle  image  velocimetry
for   application   in   wind   tunnel   flows.   Meas   Sci   Technol
8:1465?1479
362
