Effects of structural flexibility of wings in flapping flight of butterfly
This article has been downloaded from IOPscience. Please scroll down to see the full text article.
2012 Bioinspir. Biomim. 7 025002
(http://iopscience.iop.org/1748-3190/7/2/025002)
Download details:
IP Address: 130.54.110.73
The article was downloaded on 23/05/2012 at 03:48
Please note that terms and conditions apply.
View the table of contents for this issue, or go to the journal homepage for more
Home     Search     Collections    Journals    About    Contact us    My IOPscience
IOP PUBLISHING                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BIOINSPIRATION & BIOMIMETICS
Bioinspir. Biomim. 7 (2012) 025002 (15pp)                                                                                                                      doi:10.1088/1748-3182/7/2/025002
Effects of structural flexibility of wings in
flapping flight of butterfly
Kei Senda1, Takuya Obara2, Masahiko Kitamura2, Naoto Yokoyama1,
Norio Hirai3  and Makoto Iima4
1  Kyoto University, Yoshida-Honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan
2  Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-1192, Japan
3  Osaka Prefecture University, 1-1 Gakuen-cho, Nakaku, Sakai, Osaka 599-8531, Japan
4  Hiroshima University, 1-7-1 Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima 739-8521, Japan
E-mail: senda@kuaero.kyoto-u.ac.jp
Received 12 September 2011
Accepted for publication 4 April 2012
Published 22 May 2012
Online at stacks.iop.org/BB/7/025002
Abstract
The objective of this paper is to clarify the effects of structural flexibility of wings of a
butterfly in flapping flight. For this purpose, a dynamics model of a butterfly is derived by
Lagrange’s method, where the butterfly is considered as a rigid multi-body system. The panel
method is employed to simulate the flow field and the aerodynamic forces acting on the wings.
The mathematical model is validated by the agreement of the numerical result with the
experimentally measured data. Then, periodic orbits of flapping-of-wings flights are
parametrically searched in order to fly the butterfly models. Almost periodic orbits are found,
but they are unstable. Deformation of the wings is modeled in two ways. One is bending and
its effect on the aerodynamic forces is discussed. The other is passive wing torsion caused by
structural flexibility. Numerical simulations demonstrate that flexible torsion reduces the flight
instability.
(Some figures may appear in colour only in the online journal)
1. Introduction
Butterflies  can  maintain  desired  flapping-of-wings  flights
stably   against   environmental   uncertainties   and   variations
such  as  gust,  weight  gain  or  loss,  etc,  by  their  adaptation
capability, whereas they cannot repeat the same movements
with  sufficient  accuracy.  This  study  discusses  the  principle
that  realizes  flapping-of-wings  flights  which  are  rhythmical
periodic motion.
There  are  many  unknowns  for  the  stable  flight,  for
example,  ‘how  the  butterfly  moves’,  and  ‘how  the  control
is  realized’.  A  research  project  investigates  these  issues
by biological analysis through experimental observations of
living  butterflies  and  by  systems  engineering  or  synthetic
approach  [1–7].  One  of  the  obtained  results  is  that  the  free
vortices  in  the  wakes  stabilize  the  flight.  Following  these
studies,  stabilization  due  to  the  structural  flexibility  of  the
wings is demonstrated.
There  are  some  pieces  of  research  relating  deformable
wings of insects. Vanella et al [8] studied numerically using a
deformable wing model composed of two links articulated by
a rotary joint. Their two-dimensional numerical simulations
show  that  the  elastic  deformation  of  the  wings  sometimes
enhances the aerodynamic performance. Walker et al [9, 10]
and  Young  et  al  [11]  measured  deformation  of  wings  of  a
desert locust through a stroke, and showed that the camber and
twist enhance aerodynamic efficiency. Tanaka and Shimoyama
[12] made a butterfly ornithopter that can fly for a few periods
without  feedback  control  of  the  flapping  motion.  However,
the effects of deformable wings of butterflies have not been
discussed in detail; especially, the stability of flight dynamics
has not clarified yet. Further study is needed. Therefore this
study discusses two different effects of wing deformation as
follows, i.e. effects on aerodynamic forces and effects on flight
stability.
A  mathematical  model  of  a  butterfly  is  explained  in
section  2.  The  mathematical  model  of  a  flapping  butterfly
1748-3182/12/025002+15$33.00                                                                       1                          © 2012 IOP Publishing Ltd    Printed in the UK & the USA
Bioinspir. Biomim. 7 (2012) 025002                                                                                                                                                                            K Senda et al
is  constructed  for  numerical  simulations.  In  the  modeling,
the butterfly is considered as a rigid multi-body system, and
its  wings  are  flat  without  deformation.  Aerodynamic  forces
applied  to  the  wings  are  formulated  by  the  panel  method
[3–5]  where  the  influence  of  the  unsteady  wakes  can  be
incorporated.  This  model  is  referred  as  the  basic  model  in
this paper. The experimental observation of living butterflies
is  also  outlined  in  section  2.  Observation  experiments  are
conducted  using  an  experimental  system  with  a  low-speed
wind tunnel, and the motions and aerodynamic forces applied
to  the  living  butterflies  are  measured  quantitatively.  The
flapping  motion  of  a  free-flying  butterfly  is  also  measured
by the experimental system, where the trajectory of flapping
flight, i.e. the trajectory of the thorax and joints is measured.
The validity and accuracy of the numerical model are examined
by  comparing  the  calculated  aerodynamic  forces  with  the
measured experimental data. However, the flapping flight does
not continue stably even if the numerical model repeats the
measured joint trajectory.
Hence in section 3, periodic orbits of flapping-of-wings
flights  are  searched  in  order  to  fly  the  butterfly  model,  and
almost periodic orbits are obtained. The butterfly can fly for
several periods when one of those motions is just repeated,
whereas  no  feedback  control  is  applied.  It  is  reported  that
the  unsteady  wake-induced  flow  has  a  type  of  feedback
stabilization  effect  that  enables  the  butterfly  to  fly  several
periods [3, 5]. This is the feedback stabilization effect brought
by this system through the dynamic characteristic of the flow
field, and it can be considered as an implicit control. However,
the flapping flights are not sufficiently stabilized by this effect
alone and the numerical model oscillates and goes down after
several flapping motions.
In  section  4,  experiments  are  conducted  again  using
tethered   actual   butterflies,   where   wing   deformation   is
observed,   and   the   necessity   of   introducing   the   wing
deformation  into  the  basic  model  is  presented.  Structurally
flexible  wings  of  the  butterflies  are  passively  deformed  by
the  aerodynamic  forces  applied  to  the  wings.  The  above
model is called the time-varying camber model that describes
the measured deformation as a function of time. This time-
varying  camber  is  introduced  into  the  basic  model,  and
the  aerodynamic  forces  are  calculated.  The  effects  of  wing
deformation on the aerodynamic forces using this model are
quantitatively evaluated. The wing deformations of a tethered
butterfly  are  used  to  maintain  measurement  accuracy.  The
time-varying camber model is compared with the basic model
whose  wings  are  always  flat.  The  aerodynamic  effects  of
wing  deformation  are  quantified  by  using  the  experimental
observation   and   the   models.   It   will   be   shown   that   the
aerodynamic forces in the time-varying camber model agree
better with that in the experiment than that in the basis model.
It is based on the measured deformation and is the same way
that Young et al [11] did for the desert locust.
In section 5, the effects of the passive deformation to the
flight stability are clarified.
The  wings  of  the  time-varying  camber  model  are  not
passively  deformed  by  aerodynamic  forces  applied  to  the
wings  because  the  wing  deformation  is  given  as  a  function
of time. In the case of the structurally flexible wings of actual
butterflies, the wing motion determines the flow field around
the wings, and the aerodynamic forces applied to the wings
determine  the  elastic  deformation  of  the  wings.  This  is  a
fluid–structure  interaction  problem.  To  determine  the  wing
deformation  accurately  by  solving  the  problem,  a  precise
model  of  wing  stiffness  distribution  is  needed.  It  is  almost
impossible to calculate the deformation accurately because this
precise modeling is more difficult than the wing deformation
measurement.
As the  typical  modeling  of  the deformation,  only  wing
torsion is modeled [13–15] when the measurements of the wing
deformation  are  inaccurate.  In  this  study,  a  passive  torsion
model  is  introduced  where  a  flat  wing  is  passively  twisted
in  accordance  with  the  aerodynamic  disturbance.  The  joint
trajectory of the basic model can be controlled to the desired
trajectory  without  error,  whereas  that  of  actual  butterflies
cannot be controlled as well because their wings are twisted
by various unexpected disturbances. The passive torsion model
is compared with the basic model whose wings always track
the planned trajectory. It will be shown that the passive wing
deformation increases the stability of flapping flight.
Sections 3 and 5 deal with the flight dynamics of butterflies
that discuss the stabilizing effects introduced by the implicit
controls.  The  model  in  this  study  will  agree  well  with
experimental results in section 2, whereas both the rigid multi-
body  model  in  section  3  and  the  passive  torsion  model  in
section 5 are unstable in terms of flight dynamics. Hence, a
living butterfly stabilizes its flight by an active control though
its flight dynamics may be unstable. Taylor and Zbikowski [16]
also consider that the flight dynamics of the desert locust is
unstable and is stabilized by an active control. It is reasonable
that the model is dynamically unstable if the modeled original
system is unstable. In this situation, it is difficult to predict the
behavior of original system qualitatively by using the model.
If the model and/or the initial state has an even small error
from those of the original system, the error increases in time
because of the instability. Therefore, this study will not obtain
quantitative results but qualitative results. It is that the stability
of the flapping butterfly is increased by the unsteady wake-
induced flow in section 3 and by the passive wing torsion in
section 5.
Finally, concluding remarks are given in section 6.
2. Model and experiments of butterfly
2.1. Outline of flapping mechanism
Figure  1  schematically  illustrates  a  flapping  mechanism  of
insects that is driven by indirect muscles [17]. The wings are
connected to the thorax by lever mechanisms, where the wings
have been evolved from exoskeleton. The end of the wing link
is connected to the lateral suctum by a hinge in the thorax. The
wing link is also connected to the thoracic wall in the thorax
by the other hinge next to the end hinge. When the suctum
lifts up, the principle of leverage moves the wing down. The
horizontal muscles connecting the front wall to the posterior
wall  of  the  thorax,  which  are  known  as  dorsal  longitudinal
2
Bioinspir. Biomim. 7 (2012) 025002                                                                                                                                                                            K Senda et al
Figure 1. Indirect muscle system driving wing mechanism (left:
thorax cross section, right: thorax longitudinal section).
muscles,  tend  to  contract  and  increase  the  curvature  of  the
suctum.  The  butterflies  have  vertical  muscles  known  as  the
dorsoventral muscles running from the roof of the thorax to
the  floor.  Contraction  of  the  dorsoventral  muscles  pulls  the
suctum down. Relaxation of the dorsoventral muscles results
in the dorsal longitudinal muscles’ contraction and the suctum
is pushed up. This flapping mechanism can be considered as
almost  one  degree-of-freedom  (DOF)  vibrating  mechanism.
A butterfly contracts the dorsoventral muscles periodically to
vibrate the mechanism for flapping of the wings. According to
experimental observations in a later section, each butterfly has
an almost unique flapping eigenfrequency. It may be because to
vibrate sympathetically at eigenfrequency of the mechanism
realizes  efficient  flapping  motion  [18].  As  suggested  in  the
anatomical observation below, the other direct muscles may
add slight motions, which are in the extent of modification to
the basic vibration.
2.2. Dynamics model of butterfly as a rigid multi-body system
A  butterfly  is  modeled  by  a  rigid  multi-body  system  in  the
same way as typical robot modeling, which is simple dynamics
modeling. The model defined in this section is referred as the
basic  model.  In  later  sections,  it  will  be  modified  so  as  to
consider wing deformation because experimental observations
have  found  that  butterfly  wings  are  elastically  deformed  by
aerodynamic forces.
The  butterfly  model  is  a  multi-body  system  with  four
links as shown in figure 2, which is composed of the thorax
Bt  considered  as  the  main  body,  the  abdomen  Ba,  the  left
wings WL and the right wings WR. Both the model and its
motions are supposed to be symmetric bilaterally. A pair of
fore-  and  hindwings  on  each  side  is  modeled  by  a  plate  as
shown in figure 2. The joint between the thorax and wing has
three rotational DOFs and the joint between the thorax and the
abdomen has one DOF.
The  kinematics  of  the  butterfly  is  described  by  the
Lagrangian formalism
d
dt 
∂L
∂θ˙  −
∂L
∂θ = τ.                           (1)
The  Lagrangian  L   =  K  − V   is  composed  of  the  kinetic
energy K = 21 θ˙T M(θ)θ˙ and the potential energy due to gravity
Σ
Σ
θ
Σ
β + π  
 
 
−η          
                                                                                                                                             Σ
−θ
− θ
Figure 2. Frames and coordinates for the modeling of a butterfly.
V .  The  generalized  coordinates  are  divided  into  the  thorax
coordinates denoted by the subscript 1 and the joint coordinates
by the subscript 2; θ = [θ1T      θ2T ]T , where θ1   = [xzθt ]T   and
θ2  = [θaβηθ]T . As illustrated in figure 2, x, z and θt  are the
x-, z-positions and the attitude angle of the thorax, θa  is the
abdomen angle, β is the flapping angle in up–down direction, η
is the lead-lag angle and θ is the feathering angle representing
a torsion angle. The generalized forces are also divided into
τ = [τ1T     τ2T ]T ,  where  τ1   and  τ2   correspond  to  θ1   and  θ2,
respectively. Note that the inertial matrix M depends on time
through θ. The generalized force τ consists of the aerodynamic
force τair  obtained from the forces  fair  according to the panel
method developed in the following sections and the control
force τcont applied to the thorax and the joints. The Lagrangian
equation of the motion is rewritten as
Mθ¨ + M˙θ˙ − 1
2
∂
∂θ(
θ˙Mθ˙) + ∂V
∂θ = τair  + τcontrol.     (2)
By dividing the variables into the thorax part denoted by the
subscript 1 and the joint parts by the subscript 2, equation (2)
can symbolically be rewritten as
MM11      M12
21      M22
θ¨1
θ¨2 + 
h1
h2 = 
τcont1
τcont2,              (3)
where h = h1T   h2T T  = M˙θ˙ − 21 ∂∂θ (θ˙Mθ˙) + ∂∂Vθ − τair.
In  every  simulation,  θ2   is  given  as  a  desired  trajectory
θ2d(t) of  time  t.  In  a  tethered  simulation,  θ1   is  constant  in
time since the thorax is fixed. In a free-flight situation, τcont1
is  zero  because  the  butterfly  cannot  directly  apply  force  to
the thorax. In the following section, the aerodynamic forces
fair  and the generalized forces τair  are obtained by the panel
method. Then, the desired motions in both cases are realized
by τcont1  and τcont2.
In the tethered simulation, the acceleration of thorax is
θ¨1  = 0 and
τcont1  = M12θ¨2d  + h1
τcont2  = M22θ¨2d  + h2,
(4)
where τcont1  is applied to the thorax as the constraint force to
maintain θ¨1  = 0.
In the free-flight situation,
τcont1  = 0
τcont2  = M21θ¨1  + M22θ¨2d  + h2,                    (5)
where θ¨1  = −M−111(M12θ¨2d  + h1 ).
3
Bioinspir. Biomim. 7 (2012) 025002                                                                                                                                                                            K Senda et al
Figure 3. Unsteady wake computed by the panel method.
2.3. Panel method model for aerodynamics
In the flight  of  the butterfly,  there is a feature  in which the
flapping  frequency  is  small  [18]  as  well  as  small  Reynolds
number.  Moreover,  the  relative  velocity  of  the  flow  to  the
wings is completely unsteady because of the flapping motion,
whereas  the flow  to a cruising fixed-wing  aircraft is almost
steady.  Wing-tip  vortices  greatly  affect  the  aerodynamic
characteristics  because  a  butterfly  has  almost  flat  wings  of
a small aspect ratio. In addition, the flapping motion generates
very strong wing-tip vortices. The wing-tip vortices may merge
with the free vortices departing from the trailing edge, make
complex  structures  and  greatly  influence  the  aerodynamic
characteristics.
Therefore,  this  study  models  the  aerodynamics  of  a
flapping  butterfly  using  a  panel  method  [19].  Vortex  ring
element  panels  are  set  on  wing  surfaces  and  panels  with
constant strengths of vortices are shed into wakes. Unknown
strengths  of  vortices  are  determined  so  as  to  satisfy  the
boundary condition of no normal flow across the wing surfaces.
The  free  wake  model  sheds  the  panels  fulfilling  the  Kutta
condition at trailing edge and the panels move with local stream
velocity. This free wake model enables to contain the influence
of the unsteady wakes. As a result, this study made a panel
method model [3–5].
Figure 3 shows a wake computed by the panel method for
the right wing of the butterfly that is fixed at the thorax in the
uniform flow. This figure explains the necessity for considering
the influence of the unsteady wakes.
2.4. Outline of an experimental system
Verification  of  the  models  and  parameter  setting  require
fundamental    data    of    flapping-of-wings    motions    and
aerodynamic forces. For this purpose, an experimental system
with a low-speed wind tunnel is constructed and a wind tunnel
experiment is conducted using living butterflies [4].
Figure 4. Experimental setup.
Table 1. Physical properties of Parantica sita niphonica.
Total mass               M                kg           0.238 × 10−3
Aspect ratio             AR                             4.068
Wing loading          Mg/2SW         Nm−2        0.988
Thorax mass            mBt                     kg           0.095 × 10−3
Thorax length          2lBt                    m            15 × 10−3
Thorax width          2wBt                  m            8 × 10−3
Abdomen mass       mBa                    kg           0.105 × 10−3
Abdomen length     2lBa                    m            20 × 10−3
Abdomen width      wBa                    m            5 × 10−3
Wing mass              mW                     kg           0.019 × 10−3
Wing length            ytip                      m            0.049
Wing area                SW                       m2                0.118 × 10−2
The butterfly’s scientific name is Parantica sita niphonica,
which is similar to Danaus in the United States of America.
Specifications of the butterfly are listed in table 1.
The simultaneous measurement system is constructed as
illustrated in figure 4. The butterfly’s motion is measured by
an optical measurement system with three high-speed cameras
that are type FASTCAM-PCI R2 10K of Photoron Ltd. The
forces  applied  to  the  butterfly  are  measured  by  the  force
measurement system. The butterfly is tethered to the tip of the
measure, i.e. the force/torque sensor. The force/torque sensor
was made with strain gauges in laboratory. The forces L and
D, and the moment M corresponding to θt  are sensed by the
force/torque  sensor.  These  forces  apply  to  the  force/torque
sensor from the butterfly, where L is in vertical upward, D in
the mainstream and M in head-up rotation. They include the
inertia forces of flapping motion. But, this study refers L, D and
M as the lift, the drag and the pitching moment, respectively.
There  is  a  smoke  wire  for  airflow  visualization.  Motion  of
a free-flying butterfly is measured by using the experimental
system, where measured is the trajectory of flapping flight, i.e.
the trajectory of the thorax and joints.
According   to  calibration   experiments,   the  maximum
measuring  error  in  L  and  D  is  0.001  (N)  for  a  range  of
±0.02 (N), and that in M  is 0.04 × 10−3  (Nm) for ±0.6 ×
10−3 (Nm). The cutoff frequency of the measure is 50 (Hz) for
4
Bioinspir. Biomim. 7 (2012) 025002                                                                                                                                                                            K Senda et al
-900        0.02      0.04      0.06      0.08
-60
-30
0
30
60
90
Time [s]
[deg]
θ
a       β      η      θ
(a)
-0.0150         0.02       0.04       0.06       0.08
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
Time [s]
Drag [N]
Experiment
Simulation
(c)
-0.0150         0.02       0.04       0.06       0.08
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
Time [s]
Experiment
Simulation
(b)
-10         0.02       0.04       0.06       0.08
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1 x 10
-3
Time [s]
Pitching moment [Nm]
Experiment
Simulation
(d)
Figure 5. Motion and aerodynamic forces of the experiment and panel method model. (a) Motion. (b) Lift. (c) Drag. (d) Pitching moment.
noise reduction. The maximum error in position measurements
using the video images is 0.13 × 10−3  (m) in each direction,
which  is  caused  by  the  resolution  of  images:  0.260 × 10−3
(m pixel−1). Based on this error, the maximum error in the
abdomen angle is 0.37◦ for motion measurement. The smoke
is  made  of  the  propylene  glycol  by  a  smoke  wire  method.
According to an evaluation method [20], the tracers in smoke
accurately follow the air flow.
2.5. Experimental observation of motion and force
Flapping   motions   and   applied   aerodynamic   forces   are
measured by wind tunnel experiments using living butterflies
[5].   An   experiment   with   Parantica   sita   niphonica   is
conducted under a condition that the mainstream velocity is
1.54 (m s−1), the thorax position x = z = 0 (m) and its angle
θt   =  28.1◦.  Figure  5(a)  shows  the  generalized  coordinates
θ of  an  experimental  result.  Figures  5(b)–(d)  illustrate  the
measured forces, i.e. the lift L, the drag D and the pitching
moment  M.  The  butterfly  repeats  this  periodic  motion  in  a
period of 0.096 s during continuous periodic flapping-of-wings
motion. Measured aerodynamic forces are also cyclic during
the periodic flapping-of-wings motion.
As can be seen in figure 5(a), the flapping angle β  is a
cosine-like curve whose maximum and minimum are 60◦ and
−20◦. The abdomen angle θa  is also a sinusoidal curve, but
is  out  of  phase  to  the  flapping  angle  β.  When  the  butterfly
varies amplitude of β, it changes the minimum of β mainly
and the maximum marginally. The tethered butterfly swings
the  abdomen  in  a  larger  amplitude  than  butterflies  flying
freely. Even if β  or θa  changes the amplitude depending on
flying conditions and/or individuals, they keep similar smooth
cosine curves. Lead-lag angle η has a vibration mode whose
frequency is twice as large as β. The feathering angle θ varies
for  30◦  from  −10◦  to  +20◦  through  a  flapping  period.  The
flapping  cycle  is  split  into  downstroke  and  upstroke  by  the
stroke reversal at t  = 0.055 (s). Fry et al [21, 22] similarly
observe a fly’s flapping-of-wings motion.
This  fluctuation  of  the  θ  is  considered  as  a  result  of  a
passive wing torsion caused by its structural flexibility since
butterflies cannot actively twist their wings in a large angle
because  of  the  flapping  mechanism.  Actually,  the  torsional
torque applied to a wing varies for 0.3 × 10−3  (Nm) and θ
changes  for  28◦  as  the  passive  torsion  that  is  estimated  by
using  the  wing  rigidity  measured  in  a  later  section.  In  the
later  section,  the  passive  wing  torsion  is  introduced  to  the
model, and its effect on the flapping-of-wings flight stability
is evaluated.
The  joint  trajectory  of  the  tethered  butterfly  might  be
different  from  that  of  the  free-flying  butterfly.  Actually,  the
numerical model of the free-flying butterfly falls down quickly
if  the  measured  joint  trajectory  of  the  tethered  butterfly  is
used. Therefore, this study considers the data obtained by the
aerodynamic force measuring experiment as the fundamental
data  to  evaluate  the  basic  model,  but  does  not  regard  them
as  the  joint  trajectory  of  the  free-flying  butterfly.  Fry  et  al
[22] discuss the differences in flapping motions of flies under
tethered and free-flying conditions.
2.6. Verification of the mathematical model
The wing on each side is divided by ten panels in the span
direction and four panels in the cord direction. There are panels
as  the  free  vortices  in  wakes  for  two  flapping  periods.  The
butterfly flaps for two periods before simulation starts in order
to converge the flow field induced by the free vortices in the
wakes. The number of panels in the cord direction is chosen as
recommended by Katz and Plotkin [19]. In typical numerical
simulations, instantaneous aerodynamic forces at any moment
change up to 1% of the averaged forces even if other numbers
increase. The thorax trajectory is changed less.
5
Bioinspir. Biomim. 7 (2012) 025002                                                                                                                                                                            K Senda et al
Figure 6. Comparison of flow fields of experimental visualization and numerical simulation by the panel method at the beginning of
downstroke (V  = 1.0 (m s−1), θt  = −10◦).
The motion of the butterfly is solved by the modified Euler
method that has the second-order accuracy, where the sampling
time  is  T/1000  and  T  is  a  flapping  period.  New  panels  of
wakes depart from the wing trailing edges every T/20. The
period T/20 is used because the differences of trajectories are
less than the differences caused by the above-mentioned wake
length  and  so  on.  Hence,  numerical  results,  e.g.  the  thorax
trajectory, converge. The obtained results agree well with the
following experimental results.
The  θ in  figure  5(a)  obtained  from  the  experiment  and
its derivatives θ˙ and θ¨ are substituted into the mathematical
models of the butterfly that is tethered on the back of the thorax.
Its  aerodynamic  forces  τair   are  illustrated  in  figures  5(b)–
(d). The forces L, D and M  in both the experiment and the
simulation include the inertia forces of flapping motion. In the
case of L, the inertial force is up to 20% of the maximum of
L. The average values of L, D and M  per flapping cycle are
0.3 × 10−3  (N), 1.8 × 10−3  (N) and 0.14 × 10−3  (Nm) in the
experiment and 0.7 × 10−3  (N), 1.3 × 10−3  (N) and 0.04 ×
10−3   (Nm)  in  the  simulation.  Validity  of  the  model  can
be  evaluated  by  comparing  the  simulation  results  with  the
experimental  data.  The  panel  method  model  can  calculate
the aerodynamic forces with the same degree of accuracy for
any experiment and agree well with them though it tends to
estimate  the  lift  being  a  little  smaller  than  the  experiment
results.  The  numerical  results  in  this  study  are  in  good
agreement  with  the  experimental  measurements.  There  are
only a few other pieces of research [23] that report numerical
results  compared  with  experimental  measurements  of  small
insects.
The left panel of figure 6 shows that the flow around the
wings is visualized by a smoke wire. From the experimental
result, it is understood that the complex flow field is formed
by  the  flapping-induced  free  vortex  in  wakes.  In  numerical
simulations of the panel method, the velocity at any point can
be obtained by Biot–Savart law, which calculates the velocity
induced by each vortex element. In the right panel of figure 6,
small arrows at lattice points denote the local velocities relative
to mainstream calculated by the panel method. In the depth
direction, the arrows are illustrated simultaneously from −0.12
to 0 (m). In the figures, more long arrows appear at a region
with  larger  induced  velocity.  These  figures  are  suitable  to
compare  with  the  experimental  images  qualitatively.  This
numerical simulation captures the unsteady flow field of the
experiment.
Viscosity effect should be considered in the model because
of  the  low  Reynolds  number  Re  ≃  103   for  the  butterfly.
However,  both  computational  and  experimental  evaluations
show  that  the  viscous  drag  is  a  negligible  amount,  with
approximately  0.5%  of  the  maximum  drag.  The  viscous
drag  is  measured  when  a  butterfly  is  stationary  and  its
wings are parallel to the mainstream. Analytical computation
for  this  situation  supports  the  experimental  measurement.
Compressibility is not taken into account because of low speed.
In  addition,  it  is  observed  by  the  smoke  wire  visualization
that  the  flow  passes  along  wing  surfaces  during  wingbeat
[1,  2].  Hence,  by  assuming  inviscid  incompressible  flow
without  separation,  a  panel  method  based  on  the  potential
flow is applied in this study. The mean wing-tip velocity and
the maximum wing-tip velocity are 4Cβ f ytip   = 1.2 (m s−1)
and 2πCβ f ytip  = 1.9 (m s−1), respectively, where Cβ ,  f  and
ytip  are the amplitude of β, the frequency of flapping and the
wing-tip length, respectively. The maximal wing-tip velocity is
larger than the velocity of the main stream u0  = 1.54 (m s−1).
It indicates that the maximal wing-tip velocity is larger than
the traveling velocity of the butterfly. The Reynolds number
estimated  by  the  mean  wing-tip  velocity  and  the  wing-tip
length is Re  = 4Cβ f y2tip/νair   = 4800. The Strouhal number
in the experiment is St  = 4Cβ f ytip/u0   = 0.80. The Froude
number is Fr = 4Cβ f ytip/g = 1.6.
Motion  of  a  free-flying  butterfly  is  measured  by  using
the  experimental  system  of  figure  4.  Figures  7(a)  and  (b),
respectively, show a period of the measured entire motion of
the periodic free flight and a numerical result where the entire
motion is calculated by the model using the measured joint
trajectory.  Figure  7(c)  shows  the  measured  joint  trajectory.
The flapping cycle is split into downstroke and upstroke by the
stroke reversal at t = 0.06 (s). The numerical result duplicates
the free flight, even though the final thorax angles are different.
The other existing models constructed by the present authors
cannot duplicate the free flight, i.e. the simple method [1], the
6
Bioinspir. Biomim. 7 (2012) 025002                                                                                                                                                                            K Senda et al
θ                                         θ
(a)
(b)
(c)
θ                                        θ
-900       0.02    0.04    0.06    0.08     0.1
-60
-30
0
30
60
90
Time [s]
[deg]
θ
a       β      η      θ
Figure 7. Measured free flying of flapping butterfly and numerical
simulation using measured joint motion. (a) Experimental
measurement. (b) Numerical simulation. (c) Joint trajectory.
lumped-vortex method considering characteristic flapping-of-
wings  effects  [2]  and  the  panel  method  model  without  free
vortices in wakes [2]. The numerical result duplicates the free
flight  considering  flow  field  induced  by  the  free  vortices  in
wakes.
In addition, the flapping flight of this modeled butterfly is
unstable. [5]
˙
Hence, the trajectory of the model is necessarily
different from that of the living butterfly because there exist
some  errors  in  modeling,  initial  condition,  etc.  It  has  not
been reported that another numerical simulation using a joint
trajectory of a living butterfly duplicates its periodic free flight.
Therefore, the obtained model is relatively accurate.
3. Periodic flapping flight of the model
The  difference  of  the  entire  free-flying  motions  and  that  of
the aerodynamic forces in figure 5 represents some dynamics
differences of the model and the actual butterfly. It shows that
the model does not perfectly reproduce the entire free-flying
motion of the actual butterfly, even though the measured joint
trajectory of an actual butterfly is used. Hence, a flapping joint
trajectory is parametrically searched below for a periodic free
flight of the numerical model.
3.1. Trajectory search method
The periodic flapping-of-wings flight is defined as ‘all other
than x in state vector θf  and θ˙f  after a flapping period T agrees
with initial values θs  and θ˙s’.
Joint angle trajectories are described by the Fourier series
for periodic motions. Fourier parameters and initial conditions
are considered as learning parameters of vector w to find a
trajectory  of  the  periodic  flapping-of-wings  flight.  In  order
to  reduce  computation  efforts,  the  number  of  parameters  is
cut down based on the knowledge from the experiments and
observation.
The  following  cost  function  J  is  used  for  the  learning
evaluation:
J = 	
i
Qi(θfi  − θsi )2
+R ⎨⎧
⎩
E(θf , θ˙f ) − E(θs, θ˙s ) + 	
j
0 T  τj dθj⎬⎫
⎭
,         (6)
where E(θ,  θ˙) = T (θ,  θ˙) + V (θ) is the mechanical energy
with  the  kinetic  energy  T (θ,  θ˙)  and  the  potential  energy
V (θ). The θj  and τj  are the angle and the torque of joint  j.
The  Qi   and  R  are  evaluation  weights.  The  suffix  i  denotes
one  of  z,  θt ,  x˙,  z˙  or  θ˙t .  The  suffix   j  also  denotes  one
of  θa,  β,  η  or  θ.  The  first  term  of  equation  (6)  evaluates
the  periodicity  of  motion  by  the  quadratic  form  of  error
between  boundaries.  The  second  term  of  equation  (6)  is
mechanical energy loss during the period. One obtains the most
efficient flapping-of-wings flight for a mathematical model by
minimizing  the  cost  function.  A  gradient  method  finds  the
above-mentioned learning parameters such that the obtained
trajectory  satisfies  the  definition  of  the  periodic  flapping-
of-wings  flight.  The  obtained  trajectories  are  evaluated  by
comparing with experimental results.
3.2. Searched trajectories
The   panel   method   model   can   obtain   almost   periodic
trajectories,  though  they  do  not  perfectly  correspond  to  the
definition  of  the  periodic  flight.  One  of  the  obtained  flights
is illustrated in figure 8. Figures 8(a)–(c) show the searched
flapping  motion,  the  searched  joint  trajectory  and  the  joint
trajectory  measured  by  the  experiment,  respectively.  The
searched joint trajectory (figure 8(b)) is similar to the measured
joint  trajectory  (figure  8(c)).  There  are  some  different  joint
trajectories  that  realize  almost  periodic  trajectories.  On  the
other  hand,  joint  trajectories  of  free  flights  measured  from
living butterflies are more versatile. The peak and bottom of
the flapping angle β are approximately 90◦  and −60◦  in the
numerical  simulation  and  90◦  and  −70◦  in  the  experiment.
Those  of  the  abdomen  angle  θa   are  approximately  60◦  and
−60◦  in the numerical  simulation and 60◦  and −70◦  in the
experiment. The peak and bottom positions of time are almost
the  same.  The  differences  of  amplitudes  of  β  and  θa   are
approximately 6% and 8%, respectively. The differences have
almost the same dynamical effects as those of inertia because
a butterfly changes the abdomen mass during experiments.
The  butterfly  can  fly  for  several  periods  when  one  of
those motions is just repeated, whereas no feedback control is
applied. It is reported that the unsteady wake-induced flow has
a type of feedback stabilization effect that enables the butterfly
to fly several periods [3, 5], although the details are not men-
tioned in this paper. This is the feedback stabilization effect
7
Bioinspir. Biomim. 7 (2012) 025002                                                                                                                                                                            K Senda et al
θ                                                 θ
(a)
(b)
(c)
-900          0.05        0.1         0.15
-60
-30
0
30
60
90                 θ
a        β       η       θ
-900          0.05        0.1         0.15
-60
-30
0
30
60
90                  θa        β       η       θ
Figure 8. Almost periodic flapping-of-wings flight of the panel
method model with flat wings and its original joint trajectory
measured by experiment. (a) Almost periodic flight obtained by
numerical simulation. (b) Joint trajectory obtained by numerical
simulation. (c) Joint trajectory measured by experiment.
brought by this system through the dynamic characteristic of
the flow field, and it can be considered as an implicit control.
The solid line with open squares in figure 15(a) illustrates
that the flapping flight of the model is leaving gradually from
the initial flight and destabilized after four flapping periods. It
is also seen in figure 15(a) that the oscillation of the thorax
causes the instability of the flight, though the mathematical
model precisely repeats the desired joint motion by a controller
for numerical simulations.
4. Effect of wing flexibility on aerodynamic forces
The  wing  deformations  of  free-flying  butterflies  were  qual-
itatively   shown   in   some   photographs   [24]   and   sketches
[17],  whereas  quantitative  measurements  and  discussions
[15,  25–30]  have  been  limited  yet.  Experimental  measure-
ments of wing kinematics and wing structural characteristics
have  been  conducted  mainly  for  the  tethered  insects.  Wang
et al [31] measure wing deformation of a free-flying dragon-
fly using a sophisticated equipment with a seated laser light
and  high-speed  video  cameras.  They  capture  the  deforma-
tion roughly because precise and accurate measurement is not
available. A large field of view is needed because a free-flying
insect changes its position, but it results in a low resolution
and inaccurate measurements.
Three   high-speed   video   cameras   take   synchronized
images  to  maintain  measurement  accuracy.  A  wing  model
with  a  time-varying  camber  is  introduced  into  the  basic
model,  where  the  parameters  to  represent  the  deformation
are  determined  at  each  time  so  that  the  outer  shape  of  the
model agrees with the outline of video images. This is a robust
three-dimensional reconstruction method as well as the strip
method of Willmott and Ellington [25, 26], whereas the wing
deformation model used in this method is different from the
strip method. Walker et al [9, 10] measured the deformation
of wings of a desert locust, whereas deformations of butterfly
wings have not been known in detail.
Structurally   flexible   wings   of   actual   butterflies   are
passively deformed by inertia force and aerodynamic forces
applied   to   the   wings.   The   above   model   is   called   the
time-varying  camber   model  that  describes  the  measured
deformation as a function of time. This time-varying camber
is introduced into the basic model, and the aerodynamic forces
are calculated. The time-varying camber model is compared
with  the  basic  model  whose  wings  are  always  flat.  The
aerodynamic  effects  of  the  wing  deformation  are  quantified
by using the experimental observation and the models. It will
be  shown  that  some  good  effects  are  provided  by  the  wing
deformations.
4.1. Observation wing deformation
Video images of a flapping butterfly are taken to observe the
bending  of  wings.  Figures  9  and  10  show  the  images  from
three directions.
When   aerodynamic   forces   are   applied,   wings   are
deformed as follows:
(1)  At  the  beginning  of  the  downstroke  (t   =  0.008  (s)),
the  overlapping  right  and  left  wings  are  peeled  from
the leading edges with elastic deformation and become
convex upward. It is known as the peel mechanism [13].
(2)  During the downstroke (t  = 0.024, 0.040 and 0.056 (s)),
wings keep being convex upward.
(3)  In  transition  between  the  downstroke  and  the  upstroke
(t = 0.080 (s)), wings are almost flat.
(4)  During  upstroke  (t   =  0.104  (s)),  wings  are  convex
downward on the contrary.
On  each  side,  the  forewing  and  the  hindwing  almost
always  move  together  as  a  single  wing  and  do  not  flap
separately. Therefore, two wings on each side are considered
as a single wing and the time-varying camber will be modeled
later for the combined wing.
This experiment is chosen because the wing deformations
are easy to observe, whereas this is different from figure 5.
The characteristic wing deformations are observed commonly
in other experiments including that of figure 5. In the parts with
hatching in figure 5, numerical simulations often have large
differences from experiments. The wings are convex upward
in the former part, and they are convex downward in the latter.
The wings deform largely in both parts.
In the simulation, the difference should be caused since
the butterfly is modeled by the rigid wings in the simulation.
Therefore,  the  structural  flexibility  of  wings  needs  to  be
modeled and the effects evaluated.
8
Bioinspir. Biomim. 7 (2012) 025002                                                                                                                                                                            K Senda et al
Figure 9. Wing deformations of experiment and model (top: t = 0.008 (s), middle: t = 0.024 (s), bottom: t = 0.040 (s)).
9
Bioinspir. Biomim. 7 (2012) 025002                                                                                                                                                                            K Senda et al
Figure 10. Wing deformations of experiment and model (top: t = 0.056 (s), middle: t = 0.080 (s), bottom: t = 0.104 (s)).
10
Bioinspir. Biomim. 7 (2012) 025002                                                                                                                                                                            K Senda et al
γ
γ
ψ
ψ
Figure 11. Airfoil function ψh  defined by two lines.
4.2. Wing model with the time-varying camber
The modeled wings which can bend are shown in lower panels
of figures 9 and 10 and the modeled wings successfully capture
the deformations of the real wings. The shapes of the wings are
given as a function of time that is observed in the experiment,
where the reason will be described later.
As shown in figure 11, the airfoil is defined as a hyperbolic
curve ψh  that has two tangent lines. At a time, all of the front
side tangent lines along the span direction are on a same flat
plane.  The  rear  side  tangent  lines  also  form  a  flat  plane  at
a time. Hence, the wing configuration is defined by two flat
planes,  i.e.  the  front  side  plane  and  the  rear  side  plane.  By
using video images of the experiment, the front side plane and
the rear side plane are determined to be tangent at the leading
edge of forewing and at the hindwing, respectively.
The  wing  configuration  is  determined  as  a  function  of
time, where the parameters defining the front side plane and
the  rear  side  plane  are  given  as  functions  of  time.  In  the
panel method, vortex panels are placed on the wings whose
configurations are defined above.
4.3. Effects on aerodynamic forces caused by wing
deformation
Figure 12 shows the aerodynamic forces of the experiment,
the panel method model with flat wings and that with time-
varying  camber  wings.  The  average  values  of  L,  D  and  M
per flapping cycle are 2.4 × 10−3  (N), −2.5 × 10−3  (N) and
−0.056 × 10−3   (Nm)  in  the  experiment,  0.3 × 10−3   (N),
−2.9×10−3 (N) and −0.006×10−3 (Nm) in the panel method
model with flat wings, and 1.1×10−3 (N), −3.5×10−3 (N) and
−0.013 × 10−3  (Nm) in the model with time-varying camber
wings. In terms of the lift, the bending wing model generates
larger lift than the flat wing model during the downstroke. The
lift typically increases by the upward convex of wings during
the downstroke. In terms of the drag, the bending wing model
generates less drag than the flat wing model at the latter half of
the upstroke. It is because of the downward convex of wings
during the upstroke. As a result, the bending wing model is
closer to the experiment than the flat wing model.
The  typical  effects  of  the  deformation  caused  by  the
structural flexibility are organized as follows:
(a)  It begins immediately after beginning of downstrokes that
the wings become convex upward by the peel mechanism.
(b)  During  downstrokes,  the  wings  remain  convex  upward,
which improve the aerodynamic efficiency as increasing
the lift and decreasing the drag.
The    following    improvements    of    the    aerodynamic
efficiency  are  observed  by  comparing  the  experiment  with
the   numerical   simulation   with   bending   wings,   whereas
the  numerical  simulation  has  small  discrepancies  from  the
experiment.
-90
-60
-30
0
30
60
90
[deg]
θ
a        β       η       θ
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
-0.0150                   0.05                  0.1
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
Time [s]
Drag [N]
Experiment
Flat Wing
Bending Wing
0                   0.05                  0.1
Time [s]
Experiment
Flat Wing
Bending Wing
-1 0                   0.05                  0.1
-0.5
0
0.5
1x 10
-3
Time [s]
Pitching moment [Nm]
Experiment
Flat Wing
Bending Wing
Figure 12. Motion and aerodynamic forces of experiment, of numerical simulation with flat wings and of numerical simulation with
bending wings. (a) Motion. (b) Lift. (c) Drag. (d) Pitching moment.
11
Bioinspir. Biomim. 7 (2012) 025002                                                                                                                                                                            K Senda et al
(a)                                                                    (b)
Figure 13. Side view images of experiments to measure wing torsional rigidity. (a) Without torsion. (b) With torsion.
(c)  At the beginning of downstrokes, the experimental peel
mechanism generates larger thrust.
(d)  During  downstrokes,  the  experimental  wings  convex
upward generate larger lift.
Following  reasons  can  be  considered  why  the  panel
method model with bending wings has the quantitative error.
The  closer  the  aerodynamic  forces  to  the  experiment  are
calculated, the more accurate the wing deformation is given.
For  the  self-consistency  of  physical  phenomena,  the  wing
deformation  should  be  obtained  as  the  elastic  deformation
caused by the aerodynamic forces, whereas the deformation
has been given by the function of time from the experimental
observation.  It  will  be  a  future  subject  because  a  precise
measurement of the rigidity distribution is more difficult than
the  deformation  measurement.  Both  the  local  loads  and  the
deformations should be measured precisely all over the wings
for the rigidity distribution.
5. Effect of wing flexibility on flight dynamics
In  this   section,   only   torsion   is  considered   as   the   wing
deformation but it is obtained as the elastic deformation caused
by the aerodynamic forces, while the bending has been given
by the function of time in section 3. This model is called a
passive torsion wing model.
As  discussed  in  figure  5(a),  deformation  of  wings  is
observed  in  experiments,  and  the  structural  flexibility  leads
to  large  torsion  of  wings.  Flapping  motion  of  the  model
is  controlled  to  follow  the  desired  trajectory  without  error
in  section  3,  whereas  that  of  actual  butterflies  cannot  be
controlled  in  this  way  because  their  wings  are  twisted  by
various unexpected disturbances. This passive torsion of wings
has not been considered in the simulation of section 3. In this
section, wing torsion due to structural flexibility is introduced
to the model and its effect on the flapping-of-wings flight is
examined.
5.1. Experiments to measure wing rigidity
To introduce the passive torsion to the mathematical model, the
torsional rigidity of the wings has been measured with living
Figure 14. One-DOF damped oscillator model of wing torsion.
butterflies.  In  this  experiment,  three  typical-sized  butterflies
are chosen. Both wings of three butterflies are used to measure
rigidity.
Torsional  torque  loads  are  applied  to  a  wing  of  living
butterfly,  where  the root  of the wing is clamped  to fix  it to
the horizontal plane. The torsional angle α is measured when
torsional torque load τ is applied, where the angles are captured
from camera images. Pure torsional torque is applied by using
a jig so that the deformation of wings becomes twisting only.
The  distance  of  the  load  point  from  the  fixed-wing  root  is
half of wing length. Figure 13 shows camera images of the
experiments. No torque is applied on the wing in figure 13(a),
an appropriate torque is applied on the wing in figure 13(b)
and the difference of angles is measured as the torsional angle.
The torsional rigidity K of the wing is then given by K =
τ/α with respect to the torsional torque loads. The torsional
rigidity  of  wings  as  the  average  of  the  living  butterflies  is
approximately 6.0 × 10−4  (Nm rad−1). The damping ratio is
estimated as 0.7 from the wing motion, and it is applied to the
model.
5.2. Modeling of flexibly torsional wings
Figure 14 shows a one-DOF damped oscillator model of wing
torsion caused by its structural flexibility, where a spring and
12
Bioinspir. Biomim. 7 (2012) 025002                                                                                                                                                                            K Senda et al
(a)
0           0.2          0.4          0.6          0.8            1           1.2          1.4          1.6
-8000
-6000
-4000
-2000
0
2000
4000
6000              w/o torsion           with torsion
 
 
θ
(b)
0           0.2          0.4          0.6          0.8            1           1.2          1.4          1.6
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
w/o torsion          with torsion
θ
(c)
(d)
Figure 15. Flapping-of-wings’ flights with/without flexible torsion. (a) Height. (b) Acceleration of pitching of thorax. (c) Acceleration of
feathering angle. (d) Acceleration of pitching of thorax (0.5 t 0.75 [s]).
a damper are installed in the joint at the wing root. The model
of the wing remains as a flat plate.
This modeling defines the joint torsion torque τθ  that is
the  generalized  force  of  the  feathering  angle  representing  a
torsion angle θ as
τθ  = τ˜θ  + τθ,flex                                                                              (7)
= τ˜θ  − GP,θ (θ − θd ) − GD,θ (θ˙ − θ˙d ),             (8)
where τ˜θ  is the feedforward torque for the desired feathering
angle θd, and τθ,flex  is the feedback torque when θ  has error
from θd.  This  torque  models  the  structural  flexibility  of  the
wing. Feedback gain GP,θ  corresponds to the torsional rigidity
of the wing and GP,θ  = K. The flapping motions of the models
with and without flexibly torsional wings are the same if the
joint trajectories of the two models have no difference. Hence,
the desired trajectory θd  is commonly used for the two models.
Feedback gain GD,θ  is a damping coefficient that corresponds
to the torsional damping of the wing.
5.3. Effect of wing torsion on flapping-of-wings’ flight
Numerical simulations show how the flexible torsion changes
the flight stability using mathematical model with measured
flexibility of wings. Figures 15(a)–(c) show two trajectories
of flapping-of-wings  flights.  The  two trajectories have  been
obtained using the models with and without flexibly torsional
wings, where the same desired joint trajectories are applied
to both models. The desired joint trajectory has been obtained
by the trajectory searching for the rigid model in section 3. It
is seen that the oscillation of the thorax causes the instability
of the flight for the model without flexibly torsional wings.
The  passive  torsion  wings  extend  the  stable  flight  for  four
13
Bioinspir. Biomim. 7 (2012) 025002                                                                                                                                                                            K Senda et al
0           0.2          0.4          0.6          0.8            1           1.2          1.4          1.6
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
Time [s]
(a)                            w/o torsion          with torsion
θ
(b)
Figure 16. Other flapping-of-wings’ flights with/without flexible torsion. (a) Height. (b) Acceleration of pitching of thorax.
more periods. Figure 15(d) shows that the oscillation of θ¨t  is
reduced, especially when the butterfly without the structural
flexibility is going down at t = 0.8 (s). The joint trajectory of
the model without flexibility before falling down is almost the
same as that of the model with flexibility. The slight errors in
joint motions are caused by the difference in joint dynamics.
The wing flexibly damps the pitching oscillation of the thorax,
where the oscillation may make the butterfly fall down. As a
result, the instability of the thorax is reduced, and the flying
periods are extended.
The same stabilizing effects are demonstrated in three of
the four other simulations by the passive wing torsion in the
mathematical model, where flapping motion is different from
each case. One of them is illustrated in figure 16. Therefore,
the flexible torsion introduces the stabilization effect on the
flapping-of-wings flight.
This is a kind of feedback stabilization effect brought by
this system through the dynamic property of the wing. It can
be considered as a kind of preflex [32] as well as an implicit
control.
6. Concluding remarks
To  discuss  effects  of  the  structural  flexibility  of  the  wings
of  butterfly  in  flapping-of-wings  flights,  the  butterflies  are
modeled.  The  panel  method  has  been  applied  to  calculate
the aerodynamic forces. The flapping-of-wings flight obtained
from the parametric search of the trajectories is unstable with
the thoracic oscillation. Two models are proposed to integrate
two aspects of the wing deformation. One model, in which the
bending is modeled, has clarified the effect on the aerodynamic
forces.  In  the  other  model,  passive  wing  torsion  caused  by
structural flexibility is modeled. In this passive torsion model,
the flat wings are passively twisted due to the aerodynamic
disturbance.  Using this  model,  effects  of  passive  torsion on
flight dynamics are discussed.
The flight instability has been decreased by introducing
the  passive  wing  torsion  in  the  second  model.  The  living
butterflies  have  the  structurally  flexible  wings  that  improve
both the aerodynamic efficiency and the flight stability.
Acknowledgment
A part of this work has been financially supported by a grant
in aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education,
Science, Culture, and Sports of Japan.
References
[1]  Senda K, Tanaka T and Sawamoto M 2003 Measurement and
numerical simulation of a flapping butterfly Proc. of 2nd
Int. Symp. on Adaptive Motion of Animals and Machines
(Kyoto) pp 1–7
[2]  Senda K, Sawamoto M, Shibahara T and Tanaka T 2004 Study
on flapping-of-wings flight of butterfly with experimental
measurement Proc. of AIAA Atmospheric Flight Mechanics
Conf. (Providence, RI) pp 1–14
[3]  Senda K, Sawamoto M, Tanaka T and Shibahara T 2005
Analysis on control of flapping-of-wings flight of butterfly
Proc. of 3rd Int. Symp. on Adaptive Motion of Animals and
Machines (Ilmenau, Germany) pp 1–12
[4]  Senda K, Sawamoto M, Shibahara T, Kitamura M
and Tanaka T 2006 Study on flapping-of-wings flight of
butterfly with numerical and experimental analysis Proc. of
AIAA Atmospheric Flight Mechanics Conf. (Keystone, CO)
pp 1–16
[5]  Senda K, Sawamoto M, Kitamura M and Tanaka T 2007
Stabilization of flapping-of-wing flight of butterfly,
considering wakes Bio-mechanisms of Swimming and
Flying  ed N Kato and S Kamimura (Tokyo: Springer)
pp 193–204
[6]  Senda K, Sawamoto M, Kitamura M and Obara T 2008
Towards realization of stable flapping-of-wings flight of
butterfly Proc. of 4th Int. Symp. on Adaptive Motion of
Animals and Machines (Cleveland, Ohio) pp 62–3
[7]  Senda K, Obara T, Kitamura M and Nishikata T 2009
On flight mechanics of flapping butterfly IEEE Int.
14
Bioinspir. Biomim. 7 (2012) 025002                                                                                                                                                                            K Senda et al
Conf. on Robotics and Automation (Kobe, Japan)
pp 17–22
[8]  Vanella M, Fitzgerald T, Preidikman S, Balaras E
and Balachandran B 2009 Influence of flexibility on the
aerodynamic performance of a hovering wing J. Exp. Biol.
212 95–105
[9]  Walker S M, Thomas A L R and Taylor G K 2009
Photogrammetric reconstruction of high-resolution surface
topographies and deformable wing kinematics of tethered
locusts and free-flying hoverflies J. R. Soc. Interface
6 351–66
[10]  Walker S M, Thomas A L R and Taylor G K 2009 Deformable
wing kinematics in the desert locust: how and why do
camber, twist and topography vary through the stroke? J. R.
Soc. Interface 6 735–47
[11]  Young J, Walker S M, Bomphrey R J, Taylor G K
and Thomas A L R 2009 Details of insect wing design and
deformation enhance aerodynamic function and flight
efficiency Science 325 1549–52
[12]  Tanaka H and Shimoyama I 2010 Forward flight of swallowtail
butterfly with simple flapping motion Bioinspir. Biomim.
5 026003
[13]  Ellington C P 1984 The aerodynamics of flapping animal
flight Integr. Comp. Biol. 24 95–105
[14]  Dudley R and Ellington C P 1990 Mechanics of forward flight
in bumblebees: I. Kinematics and morphology J. Exp. Biol.
148 19–52
[15]  Wakeling J M and Ellington C P 1997 Dragonfly flight: II.
Velocities, accelerations and kinematics of flapping flight
J. Exp. Biol. 200 557–82
[16]  Taylor G K and Zbikowski R 2005 Nonlinear time-periodic
models of the longitudinal flight dynamics of desert
locusts schistocerca gregaria J. R. Soc. Interface
2 197–221
[17]  Brodsky A K 1994 The Evolution of Insect Flight (Oxford:
Oxford University Press)
[18]  Azuma A 2006 The Biokinetics of Flying and Swimming 2nd
edn (Reston, VA: American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics)
[19]  Katz J and Plotkin A 2001 Low-speed Aerodynamics 2nd edn
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
[20]  The Visualization Society of Japan 2002 Handbook of Particle
Image Velocimetry (Tokyo: Morikita Publishing)
in Japanese
[21]  Fry S N, Sayaman R and Dickinson M H 2003 The
aerodynamics of free-flight maneuvers in drosophila
Science 300 495–8
[22]  Fry S N, Sayaman R and Dickinson M H 2005 The
aerodynamics of hovering flight in drosophila J. Exp. Biol.
208 2303–18
[23]  Aono H, Liang F and Liu H 2008 Near- and far-field
aerodynamics in insect hovering flight: an integrated
computational study J. Exp. Biol. 211 239–57
[24]  Dalton S 1986 Caught in Motion (London, UK: John Calmann
and Cooper)
[25]  Willmott A P and Ellington C P 1997 Measuring the angle of
attack of beating insect wings: robust three-dimensional
reconstruction from two-dimensional images J. Exp. Biol.
200 2693–704
[26]  Willmott A P and Ellington C P 1997 The mechanics of flight
in the hawkmoth manduca sexta: I. Kinematics of hovering
and forward flight J. Exp. Biol. 200 2705–22
[27]  Wootton R J 1993 Leading edge section and asymmetric
twisting in the wings of flying butterflies J. Exp. Biol.
180 105–17
[28]  Steppan S J 2000 Flexural stiffness patterns of butterfly wings
J. Res. Lop. 35 61–77
[29]  Combers S A and Daniel L T 2003 Flexural stiffness in insect
wings: I. Scaling and the influence of wing venation J. Exp.
Biol. 206 2979–87
[30]  Combers S A and Daniel L T 2003 Flexural stiffness in insect
wings: II. Spatial distribution and dynamic wing bending
J. Exp. Biol. 206 2989–97
[31]  Wang H, Zeng L, Liu H and Yin C 2003 Measuring wing
kinematics, flight trajectory and body attitude during
forward flight and turning maneuvers in dragonflies J. Exp.
Biol. 206 745–57
[32]  Brown I E and Loeb G E 2000 A reductionist approach to
creating and using neuromuscular models Biomechanics
and Neural Control of Posture and Movement
ed J M Winters and P E Crago (New York:
Springer)
15
